1 
 THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE  
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) ACT, 2013  
________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
  _________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Prevention of sexual harassment . 
 
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF INTERNAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE  
 
4. Constitution of Inter nal Complaints Committee . 
 
CHAPTER III  
CONSTITUTION OF LOCAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE  
 
5. Notification of  District  Officer . 
6. Constit ution and jurisdiction of Local Committee . 
7. Composition tenure and other terms and  conditions of Local Committee.  
8. Grants and audit.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
COMPLAINT  
9. Complaint of sexual harassment . 
10. Conciliation . 
11. Inquiry into complaint . 
 
CHAPTER V  
INQUIRY INTO COMPLAINT  
12. Action during pendency of inquiry.  
13. Inquiry report.  
14. Punishment for false or malicious complaint and false evidence.  
15. Determination of compensation.  
16. Prohibition of publication or making known contents of complaint and inquiry proceedings.  
17. Penalty for publication or making known conten ts of complaint and inquiry proceedings . 
18. Appeal.  2 
  
CHAPTER VI  
DUTIES OF EMPLOYER  
SECTIONS  
19. Duties of employer.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
DUTIES AND POWERS OF DISTRICT OFFICER  
 
20. Duties and power s of District Officer.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Committee to submit annual report . 
22. Employer to include information in annual report.  
23. Appropriate Government to monitor implementation and maintain data.  
24. Appropriate Government to take measures to publicise the Act.  
25. Power to call for information and inspection of records.  
26. Penalty for  non-compliance with provisions of Act.  
27. Cognizance of offence by courts.  
28. Act not in derogation of any other law.  
29. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.  
30. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
 
  3 
 THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE  
(PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) ACT, 2013  
ACT NO. 14 OF 2013  
[22nd April, 2013 ] 
An Act to provide protection against sexual harassment of women at workplace and for the 
prevention and redressal of complaints of sexual harassment and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  sexual harassment results in violation of the fundamental rights of a woman to equality 
under articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India and her right to life and to live with dignity under 
article 21 of the Co nstitution and right to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or 
business with includes a right to a safe environment free from sexual harassment;  
AND WHEREAS  the protection against sexual harassment and the right to work with dignit y are 
universally recognised human rights by international conventions and instruments such as Convention on 
the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women, which has been ratified on the 25th  June, 
1993 by the Government of India;  
AND WHEREA S it is expedient to make provisions for giving effect to the said Convention for 
protection of women against sexual harassment at workplace.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows : — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent and com mencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Sexual Harassment of 
Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013.  
(2) It extends to the w hole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “aggrieved woman” means — 
(i) in relation to a workplace, a woman, of any age whether employed or not, who alleges to 
have been subjected to any act of sexual harassment by the respondent;  
(ii) in relation to dwelling place or house, a woman of any age who is employed in such a 
dwelling place or house;  
(b) “appropriate Government” means — 
(i) in relation to a workplace which is established, owned, controlled or wholly or 
substantially financed by funds provided directly or indirectly —  
(A) by the Central Government or the Union territory administration, the Central 
Government;  
(B) by the State Government, the State Government;  
 
                                                           
1. 9th December, 2013 , vide notification No. S.O. 3 606(E), dated 9th December, 2013 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (ii) in relation  to any workplace not covered under sub -clause (i) and falling within its 
territory, the State Government;  
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Local Complaints Committee nominated under 
sub-section (1) of section 7; 
 (d) “District Officer” means on of ficer notified under section 5;  
(e) “domestic worker” means a woman who is employed to do  the household work in any 
household for remuneration whether in cash or kind, either directly or through any agency on a 
temporary, permanent, part time or full time basis, but does not include any member of the family of 
the employer;  
 (f) “employee” means a person employed at a workplace for any work on regular, temporary, ad 
hoc or daily wage basis, either directly or through an agent, including a contractor, with or, without 
the knowledge of the principal employer, whether for remunerati on or not, or working on a voluntary 
basis or otherwise, whether the terms of employment are express or implied and includes a co -worker, 
a contract worker, probationer, trainee, apprentice or called by any other such name;  
 (g) “employer” means — 
(i) in re lation to any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise, 
institution, office, branch or unit of the appropriate Government or a local authority, the head of 
that department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise, insti tution, office, branch or 
unit or such other officer as the appropriate Government or the local authority, as the case may 
be, may by an order specify in this behalf;  
(ii) in any workplace not covered under sub -clause (i), any person responsible for the 
management, supervision and control of the workplace.  
Explanation . —For the purposes of this sub -clause “management” includes the person or 
board or committee responsible for formulation and administration of polices for such 
organisation;  
(iii) in relatio n to workplace covered under sub -clauses (i) and (ii), the person discharging 
contractual obligations with respect to his or her employees;  
(iv) in relation to a dwelling place or house, a person or a household who employs or benefits 
from the employment of domestic worker, irrespective of the number, time period or type of such 
worker employed, or the nature of the employment or activities perfor med by the domestic 
worker;  
(h) “Internal Committee” means an Internal Complaints Committee constituted under section 4;  
(i) “Local Committee” means the Local Complaints Committee constituted under section 6;  
(j) “Member” means a Member of the Internal Committee or the Local  Committee, as the case 
may be;  
(k) “prescribed” means  prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(l) “Presiding Officer” means the Presiding Officer of the Internal Complaints Committee 
nominat ed under sub -section (2) of section 4;  
(m) “respondent’ means a person against whom the aggrieved woman has made a complaint 
under section 9;  
  5 
 (n) “sexual harassment” includes any one or more of the followi ng unwelcome acts or behavior 
(whether directly or by implication) namely: — 
(i) physical contact and advances; or  
(ii) a demand or  request for sexual favours; or  
(iii) making sexually coloured remarks; or  
(iv) showing pornography; or  
(v) any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non -verbal conduct of sexual nature;  
(o) “workplace” includes — 
(i) any department, organisation, undertaking, establishment, enterprise, institution, office, 
branch or unit which is established, owned, controlled or who lly or substantially fi nanced by 
funds provided directly or indirectly by the appropriate Government or the local authority or a 
Government company or a corporation or a co -operative society;  
(ii) any private sector organisation or a private venture, undertaking, enterprise, institution, 
establishment, society, trust, non -governmental organisation, unit or service provider carrying on 
commercial, professional, vocational, educational, entertainmenta l, industrial, health services or 
financial activities including production, supply, sale, distribution or service;  
(iii) hospitals or nursing homes;  
(iv) any sports institute, stadium, sports co mplex or competition or games venue, whether 
residential or n ot used for training, sports or other activities relating thereto;  
(v) any place visited by the employee arising out of or during the course of employment 
including transportation by the employer for undertaking such journey;  
(vi) a dwelling place or a house;  
(p) “unorganis ed sector” in relation to a workplace means an enterprise owned by individuals or 
self-employed workers and engaged in the production or sale of goods or providing service of any 
kind whatsoever, and where the ente rprise employs workers, the number of such workers is less than 
ten. 
3. Prevention of sexual harassment .—(1) No woman shall be subjected to sexual harassment at any 
workplace.  
(2) The following circumstances, among other circumstances, if it occurs, or is present in relation to 
or connected with any act or behavior of sexual harassment may amount to sexual harassment: — 
(i) implied or explicit promise of preferential treatment in he r employment; or  
(ii) implied or explicit threat of detrimental treatment in her employment ; or  
(iii) implied or explicit threat about her present or future employment status; or  
(iv) interference  with her work or creating an intimidating or offensive or hostile work 
environment for her; or  
(v) humiliating treatment likely to affect her health or safety.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF INTERNAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE  
4. Constitution of Internal Complaints  Committee .— (1) Every employer of a workplace shall, by 
an order in writing, constitute a Committee to be known as the “Internal Complaints Committee” : 6 
 Provided that where the offices or administrative units of the workplace are located at different places 
or divisional or sub -divisional level, the Internal Committee shall be constituted at all administrative units 
or offices.  
(2) The Internal Committees  shall consist  of  the following members to be nominated by the 
employer, namely:  — 
(a) a Presiding Officer who shall be a woman employed at a senior level at workplace from 
amongst the employees:  
Provided that in case a senior level woman employee is not available, the Presiding Officer shall 
be nominated from other offices or administrative units of the workplace referred to in sub -section (1): 
Provided further that in case the other offices or administrativ e units of the workplace do not  
have a senior level woman employee, the Presiding Officer shall be nominated from any other 
workplace of the same employer or other department or organisation;  
(b) not less than two Members from amongst employees preferably committed to the cause of 
women or who have had experience in socia l work or have legal knowledge;  
(c) one member from amongst non -governmental organisations or associations committed to the 
cause of women or a person familiar with the issues relating to sexual harassment:  
Provided that at least one -half of the total Members so nominated shall be women.  
(3) The Presiding Officer and every Member of the Internal Committee shall hold office for such 
period, not exceeding three years, fr om the date of their nomination  as may be specified by the employer.  
(4) The Member appointed from amongst the non -governmental o rganisations or associations shall be 
paid such fees or allowances for holding the proceedings of the Internal Committee, by the employer, as 
may be prescribed.  
(5) Where the Pr esiding Officer or any Member of the Internal Committee, — 
(a) contravenes  the provisions of section 16; or  
 (b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any law for the time 
being in force is pending against him; or  
(c) he has been found quilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary proce eding is 
pending against him; or  
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office pre judicial to the public 
interest,  
such Presiding Officer or Member, as the case may be, shall be removed from the Committee and the 
vacancy so created or any casual  vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.  
CHAPTER III  
CONSTITUTION OF LOCAL COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE  
5. Notification of District Officer .—The appropriate Government may notify a District Magistrate 
or Additional District Magistrate or the Collector or Deputy Collector  as a District Officer for every 
District to exercise powers or discharge functions under this Act.  
6. Constitution and jurisdiction of  1[Local Committee] .—(1) Every District Officer shall constitute 
in the district concerned, a committee to be known as the “1[Local Committee ]” to receive complaints of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2016, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Local Complaints Committee” (w.e.f. 6 -5-2016).  7 
 sexual harassment from establishments where the 1[Internal Committee ] has not been constituted due to 
having less than ten workers or if the complaint is against the employer himself.  
(2) The District Officer shall designate one nodal officer in every block, taluka and  tehsil in rural or 
tribal area and ward or municipality in the urban area, to receive complaints and forward the same to the 
concerned 2[Local Committee ] within a period of seven days.  
(3) The jurisdiction of the 2[Local Committee ] shall extend to the areas of the district where it is 
constituted . 
7. Composition, tenure and other terms and conditions of 2[Local Committee ].—(1) The 2[Local  
Committee ] shall consist of the following members to be nominated by the District Officer, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson to be nominated from amongst the eminent women in the field of social work 
and committed to the cause of women;  
(b) one Member to be nominated from amongst the women working in block, taluka or tehsil or 
ward or municipality in the district;  
(c) two Members, of whom at least one shall be a woman, to be nominated from amongst such 
non-governmental organisations or associati ons committed to the cause of women or a person 
familiar with the issues relating to sexual harassment,  which may be pres cribed:  
Provided that at least one of the nominees should, preferably, have a background in law or legal 
knowledge:  
Provided further t hat at least one of the nominees shall be a woman belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes or minority community notified by the 
Central Government, from time to time;  
(d) the concerned officer dealing with th e social welfare or women and child development in the 
district, shall be a member ex officio . 
(2) The Chairperson and every Member of the Local Committee shall hold office for such period, not 
exceeding three years, form the date of their appointment as may be specified by the District Officer.  
(3) Where the Chairperson or any  Member of the 2[Local Co mmittee] — 
(a) contravenes t he provisions of section 16; or  
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any law for the time 
being in force is pending against him; or  
(c) has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary proceeding is pending 
against him; or  
(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest,  
such Chairperson or Member, as the case may  be, shall be removed from the Committee and the vacancy 
so created or any casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the provisions of 
this section.  
(4) The Chairperson or Members of the Local Committee other than the Members no minated under 
clauses (b) and (d) of sub -section (1) shall be entitled to such fees or allowances for holding the 
proceedings of the Local Committee as may be prescribed.  
8. Grants and audit .—(1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, make to the State Government grants of such sums of money as the Central 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2016, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Internal Complaints Committe e” (w.e.f. 6 -5-2016).  
2. Subs. by  s. 3 and the Second Schedule,  ibid., for “Local Complaints Committee” (w.e.f. 6 -5-2016).  8 
 Government my think fit, for being utilised for the payment of fees or allowances referre d to in sub -
section (4) of section 7.  
(2) The State Government may set up an agency and transfer the grants made under sub -section (1) to 
that agency.  
(3) The agency shall pay to the District Officer, such sums as may be required for the payment of fees 
or allowances referred to in sub -section (4) of section 7.  
(4) The accounts of the agency referred to in sub -section (2) shall be maintained and audited in such 
manner as may, in consultation with the Accountant General of the State, be prescribed and the person 
holding th e cust ody of the accounts of the agency shall furnish, to the State Government, before such 
date, as may be prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with auditors’ report thereon.  
CHAPTER IV  
COMPLAINT  
9. Complaint of sexual harassment .—(1) Any aggrieved woman  may make, in writing, a complaint 
of sexual harassment at workplace to the Internal Committee  if so constituted , or the Local Committee, in 
case it is not so constituted, within a period of three months from the date of  incident and in case of a 
series of incidents, within a period of three months from the date of  last incident:  
Provided that where such  complaint cannot be made in writing, the Presiding Officer or any Member 
of the Internal Committee or the Chairperson or any Member of the Local Committee, as the case may be, 
shall render all reasonable assistance to the woman for making the complaint in  writing:  
Provided further that the Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee may, for 
the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the time limit not exceeding three months , if it is satisfied 
that the circumstances were such which prevented the woman from filing  a complaint within the said 
period.  
(2) Where the aggrieved woman is unable to make a complaint on account of   her physical or mental 
incapacity or death or otherwise, her legal heir or such other person as may be prescribe d may make a 
complaint under this section.  
10. Conciliation. —(1) The Internal Committee or, as the case may be, the Local Committee, may, 
before initiating an inquiry under section 11 and at the request of the aggrieved woman take steps to settle 
the matter between her and the respondent through conciliation:  
Provided that no monetary settlement shall be made as a basis of conciliation.  
(2) Where settlement has been arrived at under sub -section (1), the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee, as the case may be, shall record the settlement so arrived and forward the same to the 
employer or the District Officer to take action as specified in the recommendation.  
(3) The Internal Committee or the Local C ommittee, as the case may be, shall provide the copies of 
the settlement as recorded under sub -section (2) to the aggrieved woman and the respondent.  
(4) Where a settlement is arrived at under sub -section (1), no further inquiry shall be conducted by the 
Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be.  
11. Inquiry into complaint. — (1) Subject  to the provision s of section 10, the Internal Committee or 
the Local Committee, as the case may be, shall, where the respondent is an employee, proceed to make 
inquiry into the complaint in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the 
respondent an d where no such rules  exist, in such manner as may be prescribed or in case of a domestic 
worker, the Local Committee shall, if prima facie case exist, forward the complaint to the police, within a 
period of seven days for registering the case under sectio n 509 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , and 
any other relevant provisions of the said Code where applicable:  9 
 Provided that where the aggrieved woman informs the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as 
the case may be, that any term or condition of the settlement arrived at under sub -section  (2) of section 10 
has not been complied with by the respondent, the Internal Committee or the Local Committee shall 
proceed to make an inquiry into the complaint or, as the case may be, forward the complaint t o the police:  
Provided further that where both the parties are employees, the parties shall, during the course of 
inquiry, be given an opportunity of being heard and a copy of the findings shall be made available to both 
the parties enabl ing them to make r epresentation against the findings before the Committee.  
(2) Notwithstanding an ything contained in section 509 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , the 
court may, when the respondent is convicted of the offence, order payment of such sums as it may 
consider appropriate, to the aggrieved woman by the respondent, having regard to the provisions of 
section 15.  
(3) For the purpose of making an inquiry under sub -section (1), the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee, as the case may be, shall have the  same powers as are vested in a civil court the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring  the discovery and production of documents; and  
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(4) The inquiry under sub -section (1) shall be completed within a period of ninety days.  
CHAPTER V  
INQUIRY INTO COMPLAINT  
12. Action during pendency of inquiry .—(1) During the pendency of an inquiry on a written 
request made by the aggrieved woman,  the Internal Committee or the local Committee, as the case may 
be, may recommend to the employer to — 
(a)  transfer the aggrieved woman or the respondent to any other wor kplace; or  
(b) grant leave to the aggrieved woman up to a period of three months; or  
(c) grant such other relief to the aggrieved woman a may be prescribed.  
(2) The leave granted to the aggrieved woman under this section shall be in addition to the leave she 
would be otherwise entitled.  
(3) On the recommendation of the Internal Committee  or the Local Committee, as the case may be, 
under su b-section (1), the employer shall implement the recommendations made under sub -section (1) 
and send the report of such implementation to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case 
may be.  
13. Inquiry report .—(1) On the completion of an inquiry under this Act, the Internal Committee or 
the Local Committee , as the case may be, shall provide a report of its findings to the employer, or as the 
case may be, the District Officer within a period of ten days from the date of completion of the inquiry 
and such repo rt be made available to the concerned parties.  
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at the 
conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has not been proved, it shall recommend to the 
employ er and the  District Officer that  no action is required to be taken in the matter.  10 
 (3) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at the 
conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has been proved, it shall recommend to  the employer 
or the District Officer, as the case may be — 
(i) to take action for  sexual harassment as a misconduct in accordance with the provisions of the 
service rules applicable to the respondent or where no such service rules have been made, in such 
manner as may be prescribed;  
(ii) to deduct, notwithstanding anything in the service rules applicable to the respondent, from the 
salary or wages of the respondent such sum as it may consider appropriate to be paid to the aggrieved 
woman or to h er legal he irs, as it may determine, in accordance with the provisions of section 15:  
Provide that in case the employer is unable to make such deduction from the salary of the 
respondent due to his being absent from duty or cessation of employment it may direct to th e 
respondent to pay such sum to the aggrieved woman:  
Provided further that in case the respondent fails to pay the sum referred to in clause (ii), the 
Internal Committee or as, the case may be, the Local Committee may forward the order for recovery 
of the sum as an arrear of land revenue to the concerned District Officer.  
(4) The employer or the District Officer shall act upon the recommendation wit hin sixty days of its 
receipt by him.  
14. Punishment for false or malicious complaint and false evidence. —(1) Where the Internal 
Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at a conclusion that the allegation against 
the respondent is mal icious or the aggrieved woman or any other person making the complaint has made 
the complaint knowing it to  be false or the aggrieved woman or any other person making the complaint 
has produced any forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the em ployer or the District 
Officer, as the case may be, to take action against the woman or the person who has made the complaint 
under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) of section 9, as the case may be, in accordance with the 
provisions of the service rules applicable to her or him or where no such service rules exist, in such 
manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that a mere inability  to substantiate a complaint or prov ide adequate proof need not attract 
action against the complainant under this section:  
Provided further that the malicious intent on part of the complainant shall be established after an 
inquiry in accordance with the procedure prescribed, before any actio n is recommended.  
(2) Where the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, arrives at a conclusion 
that during the inquiry any witness has given false evidence or produced any forged or misleading 
document, it may recommend to the employer of the witness or  the District Officer, as the case may be, to 
take action in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said witness or where 
no such service rules exist, in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
15. Determination of compensation. —For the purpose of determining  the sums to be paid to the 
aggrieved woman under clause (ii) of sub -section (3) of section 13, the Internal Committee or the Local 
Committee, as the case may be, shall have regard to — 
(a) the mental trauma, pain, suffering and emotional distress caused to the aggrieved woman;  
(b) the loss in the career opportunity due to the incident of sexual harassment;  
(c) medical expenses incurred by the victim for physical or psychiatric treatment;  
(d) the income and financial status of the respondent;  
(e) feasibility of such payment in lump sum or in instalments.  11 
 16. Prohibition of publication or making known contents of co mplaint and inquiry 
proceedings. —Notwithstan ding anything contained in the Right to Information Act, 2005  (22 of 2005) , 
the contents of the  complaint made under section 9, the identity and addresses of the aggrieved woman, 
respondent and witnesses, any information relating to conciliation and inquiry proceedings,  
recommendations of the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case may be, and the action 
taken by the employer or the District Officer under the provisions of this Act shall not be published, 
communicated or made known to the public, press and media in any manner:  
Provided that information may be disseminated regarding the justice secured to any vicitim of sexual 
harassment under this Act without disclosing the name, address, id entity or any other particulars  
calculated to lead to the identification of the aggrieved w oman and witnesses.  
17. Penalty for publication or making known contents of complaint and inquiry proceedings .— 
Where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal with the complaint, inquiry or any 
recommendations or action to be taken under the provisions of this Act, contravenes the provision s of 
section 16, he shall be liable for penalty in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable 
to the said person or where no such service rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed.  
18. Appeal. —(1) Any person aggrieved from the recommendations made under sub -section (2) of 
section 13 or under clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub -section (3) of section 13 or sub -section (1) or sub -
section (2) of section 14 or section 17 or non -implementat ion of such recommendations may prefer an 
appeal to the court or tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said 
person or where no such service rules exist then, without prejudice to provisions contained in any other  
law for the time being in force, the person aggrieved may prefer an appeal in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The appeal under sub -section (1) shall be preferred within a period of ninety days of the 
recommendations.  
CHAPTER VI  
DUTIES OF EMPLOYER  
19. Duties of employer. — Every  employer shall — 
(a) provide a safe working environment at the workplace with shall include safety from the 
persons coming into contact at the workplace;  
(b) display  at any conspicuous place in the workplace, the penal consequences of sexual 
harassments; and the order constituting, the Internal Committee under sub -section (1) of section 4;  
(c) organise workshops  and awareness prog rammes at regular intervals for sensiti sing the 
employees with the provisions of the Act and orientation programmes for the members of the Internal 
Committee in the manner as may be prescribed;  
(d) provide necessary facilities to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the case  
may be, for dealing with the complaint and conducting an inquiry;  
(e) assist in securing the attendance of respondent and witnesses before the Internal Committee or 
the Local Committee, as the case may be;  
(f) make  available such information to the Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as the 
case be, as it may require having regard to the complaint made under sub -section (1) of section 9;  
(g) provide assistance to the woman if she so chooses to file a complain t in relation to the offence 
under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force;  
(h) cause to initiate action, under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time 
being in force, against the perpetrator , or if the aggrieved woman so desires, where the perpetrator is 
not an employee, in the workplace at which the incident of sex ual harassment took place;  12 
 (i) treat sexual harassment as a misconduct under the service rules and initiate action for such 
misco nduct;  
(j) monitor the timely submission of reports by the Internal Committee.  
CHAPTER VII  
DUTIES AND POWERS OF DISTRICT OFFICER  
20. Duties and powers of District Officer. —The District Officer shall , — 
(a) monitor  the timely submission of report furnished by the Local Committee;  
(b) take such measures as may be necessary for engaging non -governmental organisations for 
creation of awareness on sexual harassment and the rights of the women.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
21. Committee to submit annual report .— (1) The Internal Committee or the Local Committee, as 
the case may be, shall in each calendar year prepare, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, 
an annual report and submit the same to the employer an d the District Officer.  
(2) The District Officer shall forward a brief report on the annual reports received under sub -sectio n 
(1) to the State Government.  
22. Employer to include information in annual report .—The employer shall include in its report 
the number of cases filed, if any, and their disposal under this Act in the annual report of his organisation 
or where no such report is required to be prepared, intimate such number of cases, if any,  to the District 
Officer.  
23. Appropriate Government to mon itor implementation and maintain data .—The appropriate 
Government shall monitor the implementation of this Act and maintain date on the number of cases filed 
and disposed of in respect of all cases of sexual harassment at workplace.  
24. Appropriate Government to take measures to publicise the Act .—The appropriate 
Government may, subject to the availability of financial and other resources, — 
(a) develop relevant information, education, communication and training materials, and organise 
awareness prog rammes, to advance the understanding of the  public of the provisions of this Act 
providing for protection against sexual harassment of woman at workplace;  
(b) formulate orientation and training programmes for the members of the 1[Local Committee ]. 
25. Power to call for information and inspection of records. —(1) The appropriate Government, on 
being satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest or  in the interest of women employees at a 
workplace to do so, by order in writing, — 
(a) call upon any employer or District Officer to furnish in writing such information relating to 
sexual harassment as it may  require;  
(b) authorise any officer to make inspection of the records and workplace in relation to sexual 
harassment, who shall submit  a report of such inspection to it within such period as may be specified 
in the order.  
(2) Every employer and District Officer shall produce on demand before the officer making the 
inspection all information, records and other documents in his custody hav ing a bearing on the subject 
matter of such inspection.  
26. Penalty for non -compliance with provisions of Act .—(1) Where the employer fails to — 
(a) constitute an Internal Committee under sub -section (1) of section 4;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 23 of 2016, s. 3 and the Second Schedule, for “Local Complaints Committee” (w.e.f. 6 -5-2016).  13 
 (b) take action under sections 13, 14 and 22; and  
(c) contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets contravention of other provisions of this Act or 
any rules made thereunder,  
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.  
(2) If any employer, after having been previously convicted of an offence punishable under this Act 
subsequently commits and is convicted of the same offence, he shall be liable to — 
(i) twice  the punishment, which might have been imposed on a first conviction, subject to the 
punishment being maximum provided for the same offence:  
Provided that in case a higher punishment is prescribed under any other law for the time being in 
force, for the of fence for which the accused is being prosecuted, the court shall take due cognizance 
of the same while awarding the punishment;  
(ii) cancellation, of his licence or withdrawal, or non -renewal, or approval, or cancellation of the 
registration, as the case m ay be, by the Government or local authority required for carrying on his 
business or activity.  
27. Cognizance of offence by courts. —(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable 
under this Act or any rules made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the aggrieved woman or any 
person authorised by the Internal Committee or Local Committee in this behalf.  
 (2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punish able under this Act.  
(3) Every offence under this Act shall be non -cognizable.  
28. Act not in derogation of any other law .—The prov isions of this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in for ce. 
29. Power of appropriate Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government  may, by 
notification in the Official  Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Members under sub -section (4) of section 4;  
(b) nomination  of members under clause (c) of sub -section (1) of section 7;  
(c) the fees or allowances to be paid to the Chairperson, and Members under sub -section (4) of 
section 7;  
(d) the person who may make complaint under sub -section (2) of section 9;  
(e) the manner of inquiry under sub -section (1) of section 11;  
(f) the powers for making an inquiry under clause (c) of sub -section  (2) of section 11;  
(g) the relief to be recommended under clause (c) of sub -section (1) of section 12;  
(h) the manner of action to be taken under clause (i) of sub -section (3) of section 13;  
(i) the manner of actio n to be taken under sub -section s (1) and (2) of section 14;  
(j) the manner of action to be taken under section 17;  
(k) the manner of appeal under sub -section (1) of section 18;  14 
 (l) the manner of organis ing workshops, awareness programmes for sensitis ing the employees and 
orientation programmes for the members of the Internal Committee under clause (c) of section 19; 
and 
(m) the form and time for preparation of annual report by Internal Committee and the Local 
Committee under sub -section (1) of section 21.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each  House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessio ns aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any suc h modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
(4) Any rule made under sub -section (4) of section 8 by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or 
where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
30. Power to remove dif ficulties.— (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
 
 
    1 
 THE COMMISSION OF SATI (PREVENTION) ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 3 OF 1988  
[3rd January , 1988 .] 
An Act to provide for the more effective prevention of the commission of sati and its 
glorification and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto , 
WHEREAS  sati or the burning or burying alive of widows or women is revolting to the feelings of 
human nature and is nowhere enjoined by any of the religions of India as an imperative duty;  
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary to take more effective measures to prevent the commission of sati and 
its glorification;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Commis sion of Sati 
(Prevention) Act, 1987.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates m ay be appointed for different States.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(b) “glorification ”, in relation to sati, whether such sati, was committed before or after the 
commencement of this Act,  includes, among other things, — 
(i) the observance of any ceremony or the taking out of a procession in connection with the 
commission of sati; or 
(ii) the supporting, justifying or propagating the practice of sati in any manner; or  
(iii) the arranging  of any function to eulogise the person who has committed sati; or 
(iv) the creation of a trust, or the collection of funds, or the construction of a temple or other 
structure or the  carrying on of any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony thereat, 
with a view to perpetuate the honour of, or to preserve the memo ry of, a person who has 
committed sati; 
(c) “sati” means the act of burning or burying alive of — 
(i) any widow along with the body of her deceased husband or any other relative or with any 
article, object or thing associated with the husband or such relative; or  
(ii) any woman along with the body of any of her relatives, irrespective of whether such 
burning or burying is claimed to be voluntary on the part of the widow or the woman or 
otherwise;  
(d) “Special Court ” means a Special Court constituted un der section 9;  
(e)  “temple” includes any building or other structure, whether roofed or not, con structed or made 
to preserve the memory of a person in respect of whom sati has been committed or used or intended 
to be used for the carrying on of any form of worship or for the observance of any ceremony in 
connection with such commis sion.  
                                                           
1. 21st March , 198 8, vide notification No. G.S.R. 359(E), dated 21st March , 198 8, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,   Part II, 
sec. 3( i).    2 
 (2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Pe nal Code     
(45 of 1860), or in the Code shall have the same meanings as are respectively assigned to them in the 
Indian Penal Code or the Code.  
PART  II 
PUNISHMENTS FOR OFFENCES RELATING TO SATI  
3. Attempt to commit sati.—Notwithstanding anything contained  in the Indian Penal Code             
(45 of 1860) , whoever attempts to commit sati and does any act towards such commission shall be 
punishable  with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both:  
Provided that the Special  Court trying an offence under this section shall, before convicting any 
person, take into consideration the circumstances leading to the commission of the offence, the act 
committed, the state or mind of the person charged of the offence at the time of th e commission of the act 
and al l other rele vant factors.  
4. Abetment of sati.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
if any person commits sati, whoever abets the commission of such sati, either directly or indirectly,  shall 
be punishable with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.  
(2) If any person attempts to commit sati, whoever abets such attempt, either directly or indirectly, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, any of the following acts or the like shall also be 
deemed to be an abetment, namely: — 
(a) any inducement to a widow or woman to get her burnt or buried alive along with the body of 
her dece ased husband or with any other relative or with any article, object or thing associated with the 
husband or such relative, irrespective of whether she is in a fit state of mind or is labouring under a 
state of intoxication or stupefaction or other cause im peding the exercise of her free will;  
(b) making a widow or woman believe that the commission of sati would result in some spiritual 
benefit to her or her  deceased husband or relative o r the general well being of the family;  
(c)  encouraging a widow or wom an to remain fixed in her resolve to commit sati and thus 
instigating her to commit sati; 
(d) participating in any procession in connection with the commission of sati or aiding the widow 
or woman in her decision to commit sati by taking her along with body of her deceased husband or 
relation  to the cremation or burial ground;  
(e) being present at the place where sati is committed as an active participant to such commission 
or to any ceremony  connected with it;  
(f) preventing or  obstructing the widow or woman from saving herself from being burnt or buried 
alive;  
(g) obstructing, or interfering with, the police in the discharge of its duties of taking any steps to 
prevent the commission of sati. 
5. Punishment for glorification of sati.—Whoever does any act for the glorification of sati shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to 
seven years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which ma y extend to thirty 
thousand rupees.  
PART  III 
POWERS  OF COLLECTOR  OR DISTRICT  MAGISTRATE  TO PREVENT  OFFENCES  RELATING TO SATI  
6. Power to prohibit certain acts .—(1) Where the Collector or the District Magistrate is of the 
opinion that sati or any abetmen t thereof is being,  or is about to be committed, he may, by order, prohibit 
the doing of any act towards the commission of sati by any person in any area or areas specified in the 
order.      3 
 (2) The Collector or the District Magistrate may also, by order, prohi bit the glorification in any 
manner of sati by any person in any area or areas specified in the order.  
(3) Whoever contravenes any order made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall, if such 
contravention is not punishable under any other provision of this Act, be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years and with fine which 
shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to thirty thousand rupees.  
7. Power to re move certain temples or other structures .—(1) The State Government may, if it is 
satisfied that in any temple or other structure which has been in existence for not less than twenty years, 
any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony is carried o n with a view to perpetuate the 
honour of, or to preserve the memory of, any person in respect of whom sati has been committed, by 
order, direct the removal of such temple or other structure.  
(2) The Collector or the District Magistrate may, if he is satisfied that in any temple or other structure, 
other than that referred to in sub -section ( 1), any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony is 
carried on with a view to perpetuate the honour of, or to  preserve the memory of , any person is respe ct of 
whom sati has been committed, by order, direct the removal of such temple or other structure.  
(3) Where any order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) is not complied with, the State 
Government or the Collector or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the temple or other 
structure to be removed through a police officer not below the rank of a Sub -Inspector at the cost of the 
defaulter.  
8.  Power to seize certain properties .—(1) Where the Collector or the District Magistrate has reason 
to believe that any funds or property have been collected or acquired for the purpose of glorification of 
the commission of any sati or which may be found under circumstances which create suspicio n of the 
commission of any offence under this Act, he may seize such funds or property.  
(2) Every Collector or District Magistrate acting under sub -section ( 1) shall report the seizure to the 
Special Court, if any, constituted to try any offence in relatio n to which such funds or property were 
collected or acquired and shall await the orders of such Special Court as to the disposal of the same.  
PART  IV 
SPECIAL  COURTS  
9. Trial of offences under this Act .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, all 
offences under this Act shall be triable only by a Special Court constituted under this section.  
(2) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette , constitute one or more Special 
Courts for the trial of offences under this Act and  every Special Court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect 
of the whole or such part of the State as may be specified in the notification.  
(3) A Special Court shall be presided over by a Judge to be appointed by the State Government with 
the concurrence o f the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a Special Court unless he is, 
immediately before such appointment, a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge in any State.  
10. Special Public Prosecutors .—(1) For every Special Court, the State Government shall appoint a 
person to be a Special Public Prosecutor.  
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this section only if 
he had been in  practice as an advocate for not less than seven years or has held any post for a period of 
not less than seven years under the State requiring special knowledge of law.  
(3) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this section shall be deemed to be a 
Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code and the provisions of the 
Code shall have effect accordingly.      4 
 11. Procedure and powers of Special Courts .—(1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any 
offence, without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a complaint of facts which 
constitute such offence, or upon a police report of such facts.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Special Court shall, for the purpose of th e trial of any 
offence, have all the  powers of a Court of Session and shall try such offence as if it were a Court of 
Session, so far as may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code for trial before a Court 
of Session.  
12. Power of Special Court with respect to other offences .—(1) When trying any offence under 
this Act, a Special Court may also try any other offence with which the accused may, under the Code, be 
charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with such other offence.  
(2) If, in the course of any trial of any offence under this Act it is found that the accused person has 
committed any other offence under this Act or under any other law, a Special Court may convict such 
person also of such other offence and pass any sente nce authorised by this Act or such other law for the 
punishment thereof.  
(3) In every inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as possible and, in 
particular, where the examination of witnesses has begun, the same shall be continued  from day to day 
until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, and if any Special Court finds the adjournment 
of the same beyond the following date to be necessary, it shall record its reasons for doing so.  
13. Forfeiture of funds or property .—Where a person has been convicted of an offence under this 
Act, the Special Court trying such offence may, if it is considered necessary so to do, declare that any 
funds or property seized under section 8 shall stand forfeited to the State.  
14. Appeal .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal shall lie as a matter of 
right from any judgment, sentence or order, not being an interlocutory order, of a Special Court to the 
High Court both on facts and on law.   
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the judgment, sentence or order appealed from:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expi ry of the said period of thirty  days 
if it is satisfied that the ap pellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of 
thirty days.  
PART  V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Protection of action taken under this Act .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the State Government or any officer or authority of the State Government for anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules or orders made under this 
Act. 
16. Burden of proof .—Where any person is prosecuted of an offence under sectio n 4, the burden of 
proving that he had not committed the offence under the said section shall be on him.  
17. Obligation of certain persons to report about the commission of offence under  this Act .—(1) 
All officers of Government are hereby required and empowered to assist the police in the execution of the 
provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder . 
(2) All village officers an d such other officers as may be specified by the Collector or the District 
Magistrate in relation to any area and the inhabitants of such area shall, if they have reason to believe or 
have the knowledge that sati is about to be, or has been, committed in t he area shall forthwith report such 
fact to the nearest police station.  
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years and sh all also be liable to 
fine.     5 
 18. Person convicted of an offence under section 4 to be disqualified from inheriting certain 
properties .—A person convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 in relation to the 
commission of sati shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the person in respect of whom 
such sati has been committed or the property of any other person which he would have been entitled to 
inherit on the death of the person in respect of whom such sati has b een committed.  
19. [Amendment of Act 43 of 1951 ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001 ( 30 of 2001 )   
s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f.  3-9-2001 ). 
20. Act to have over riding effect .—The provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith con tained in any enactment other than 
this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act . 
21. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total pe riod of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to th e validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
22. Repeal of existing laws .—(1) All laws in force in any State immediately before the 
commencement of this Act in that State which provide for the prevention or the glorification of sati shall, 
on such commencement, stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under any law repealed under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act, and, in  particular, any case taken cognizance of by a Special Court under the provisions of any law 
so repealed and pending before it immediately before the commencement of this Act in that State shall 
continue to be dealt with by that Special Court after such co mmencement as if such Special Court had 
been constituted under section 9 of this Act.  
 
  1 
 THE DOWRY PROHIBITION ACT, 1961  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1961  
[20th May, 1961 .] 
An Act to prohibit the giving or taking of dowry.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twelfth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Dowry Prohibition     
Act, 1961.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition of “dowry”.—In this Act, “dowry ” means any property or valuable security given or 
agreed to be given either directly or indirectly — 
(a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to the marriage; or  
(b) by the parent s of either party to a marriage or by any other person, to either party to the 
marriage or to any other person ; 
at or before  2[or any time after the marriage]  3[in connection with the marriage of the said parties, but 
does not include] dower or mahr  in the case of persons to whom the Muslim Personal Law ( Shariat ) 
applies.  
4*         *                       *                 *       * 
Explanation  II.—The expression “valuable security ” has the same meaning as in section 30 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
3. Penalty for giving or taking dowry .—5[(1)] If any person, after the commencement of this Act, 
gives or takes or abets the giving or taking of dowry , he shall be punishable  6[with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than  7[five years, and with fine which shall not be less than fifteen thousand 
rupees or the amount of the value of such dowry, whichever is more]:  
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose 
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than  8[five years].]  
 9[(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to, or in relation to, — 
(a) presents which are given at the time of a marriage to the bride (wit hout any demand having 
been made in that behalf):  
Provided that such presents ar e entered in a list maintained in accordance with the rules made 
under this Act;  
(b) presents  which are given at the time of a marriage to the bridegroom (without any demand 
having been made in that behalf):  
Provided that such presents are entered in a list maintained in accordance with the rules made 
under this Act:  
                                                           
1. 1st July, 1961, vide notification No. S.O. 1410, dated 20th June, 1961, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 2, for “or after the marriage” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
3. Su bs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
4. The Explanation I omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
5. Section 3 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) of that section  by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
7. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f.  19-11-1986).  
8. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
9. Ins. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 3 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  2 
 Provided further that where su ch presents are made by or on behalf of the bride or any person 
related to the bride, such presents ar e of a customary nature and the value thereof is not excessive 
having regard to the financial status of the person by whom, or on whose behalf, such prese nts ar e 
given.]  
1[4. Penalty for demanding dowry .—If any person demands, directly or indirectly, from the parents 
or other relatives or guardian of a bride or bridegroom, as the case may be, any dowry, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, but which may extend 
to two years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees:  
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonme nt for a term of less than six months.]  
2[4A. Ban on advertisement .—If any person — 
(a) offers, through any advertisement in any newspaper, periodical, journal or through any other 
media, any share in his property or of any money or both as a share in any business or other interest 
as consideration for the marriage of his son or daughter or any other relative , 
(b) prints or publishes or circulates any advertisement referred to in clause ( a), 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, but which 
may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to fifteen thousand rupees:  
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special reasons to be rec orded in the judgment, impose 
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months.]  
5. Agreement for giving or taking dowry to be void .—Any agreement for the giving or taking of 
dowry shall be void.  
6. Dowry to be for the benefit of the wife or h er heirs .—(1) Where any dowry is received by any 
person other than the woman in connection with whose marriage it is given, that person shall transfer it to 
the woman — 
(a) if the dowr y was received before marriage, within  3[three months] after the date of       
marriage; or  
(b) if the dowry was received at the time of or after the marriage, within  3[three months] after the 
date of its receipt; or  
(c) if the dowry was received when the woman was a minor, within  3[three months] after she has 
attained the age of eighteen years;  
and pending such transfer, shall hold it in trust for the benefit of the woman.  
4[(2) If any person fails to transfer any property as required by sub -section ( 1) within the time limit 
specified therefor  5[or as required by sub -section ( 3),] he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than six months, but which may extend to two years or with fine  6[which 
shall not be less than five thousand rupees, but which may extend to ten thousand rupees] or with both.]  
(3) Where the woman entitled to any property under sub -section ( 1) dies before receiving it, the heirs 
of the woman shall be entitled to claim it from the person holding it for the time being:  
7[Provided that where such woman dies within seven years of he r marriage, otherwise than due to 
natural causes, such property shall, — 
(a) if she has no children, be transferred to her parents , or 
(b) if she has children, be transferred to such children and pending such transfer, be held in trust 
for such children.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s . 4, for section 4 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 4 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 5, for “one year” (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
5. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 5 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
6. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “which may extend to ten thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
7. The proviso inserted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  3 
 1[(3A) Where a person convicted under sub -section ( 2) for failure to transfer any property as required 
by sub -section ( 1) 2[or sub -section ( 3)] has not, before his conviction under that sub -section, transferred 
such property to the woman entitled thereto or , as the case may be,  3[her heirs, parents or children] the 
Court shall, in addition to awarding punishment under that sub -section, direct, by order in writing, that 
such person shall transfer the property to such woman or, as the case may be,  3[her heirs, parents or 
children] within such period as may be specified in the order, and if such person fails to comply with     
the direction within the period so specified, an amount equal to the value of the property may be 
recovered from him as if it were a fine imposed by such Court and paid to such woman or, as the case 
may be, 3[her heirs, parents or children ].] 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the provisions of section 3 or section 4.  
4[7. Cognizance of offences .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), — 
(a) no Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence under this Act;  
(b) no court shall take co gnizance of an offence under this Act except upon — 
(i) its own knowledge or a police report of the facts which constitute such offence, or  
(ii) a complaint by the person aggrieved by the offence or a parent or other relative of such 
person, or by any recog nised welfare institution or organisation;  
(c) it shall be lawful for a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class to 
pass any sentence authorised by this Act on any person convicted of an offence under this Act.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “recogni sed welfare institution or organisation ” 
means a social welfare institution or organisation recogni sed in this behalf by the Central or State 
Government.  
(2) Nothing in Chapter XXXVI of the Code of Criminal Proced ure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , shall apply to 
any offence punishable under this Act.]  
5[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force a statement made by 
the person aggrieved by the offence shall not subject such person to a prosecu tion under this Act.]  
6[8. Offences to be cognizable for certain purposes and to be  bailable and                                
non-compoundable .—(1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply to offences 
under this Act as if they were cognizable offences — 
(a) for the purposes of investigation of such offences; and  
(b) for the purposes of matters other than — 
(i) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code; and  
(ii) the arrest of a person without a warrant or without an order of a Magistrate.  
(2) Every offence under this Act shall be  7[non-bailable] and non -compoundable.]  
8[8A. Burden of proof in certain cases .—Where any person is prosecuted for taking or abetting the 
taking of any dowry under section 3, or the demanding of dowry under section 4, the burden of proving 
that he had not committed an offence under th ose sections shall be on him.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
2. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s.  5 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “her heirs” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
4. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 6, for section 7 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
5. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 6 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
6. Subs. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 7, for section 8 ( w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
7. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 7, for “bailable” (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  
8. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  4 
 8B. Dowry Prohibition Officers .—(1) The State Government may appoint  as many D owry 
Prohibition Officers as it thinks fit and specify the areas in respect of which they shall exercise their 
jurisdiction and powers under this Act.  
(2) Every Dowry Prohibition Officer shall exercise and perform the following powers and functions, 
namely :— 
(a) to see that the provision s of this Act are complied with;  
(b) to prevent, as far as possible, the taking or abetting the taking of, or the demanding of, dowry;  
(c) to collect such evidence as may be necessary for the prosecution of persons committing 
offences under the Act; and  
(d) to perform such additional functions as may be assigned to him by the State Government, or 
as may be specified in the rules made under this  Act. 
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, confer such powers of a police 
officer as may be specified in the notification on the Dowry Prohibition Officer who shall exercise such 
powers subject to such limitations and cond itions as may be specified by rules made under this Act.  
(4) The State Government may, for the purpose of advising and assisting Dowry Prohibition Officers 
in the efficient performance of their functions under this Act, appoint an advisory board consisting  of not 
more than five social welfare workers (out of whom at least two shall be women) from the area in respect 
of which such Dowry Prohibition Officer exercises jurisdiction under sub -section ( 1).] 
9. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
1[(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the form and manner in which, and the person s by whom, any list of presents referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) of section 3 shall be maintained and all other matters connected therewith; and  
(b) the better co -ordination of policy and action with respect to the administration of this Act.]  
2[(3)] Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  3[in two or more successive sessions, and if, be fore the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid], both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect on ly 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be , so however that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
4[10. Power of the State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the foll owing matters, namely: — 
(a) the additional functions to be performed by the Dowry Prohibition Officers under               
sub-section ( 2) of section 8B;  
(b) limitations and conditions subject to which a Dowry Prohibition Officer may exercise his 
functions  under sub -section ( 3) of section 8B.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after 
it is made before the State Legislature.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 63 of 1984, s. 8 (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
2. Sub -section ( 2) renumbered as sub -section ( 3) thereof by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 -10-1985).  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 1983, s. 2 and the Schedule , for certain words (w.e.f. 15 -3-1984).  
4. Subs. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 9, for section 10 (w.e.f. 19 -11-1986).  THE IMMORAL TRAFFIC (PREVENTION) ACT, 1956 
 
An Act to provide in pursuance of the International  Convention signed at New York on the 9th 
day of May, 1950, for the prevention of immoral tra ffic. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This A ct may be called The Immoral Traffic 
(Prevention) Act, 1956. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) This section shall come into force at once; and  the remaining provisions of this come into 
force on such date as the Central Government may, b y notification in the official Gazette, 
appoint. 
2. Definitions.—In this Act. unless the context oth erwise requires— 
(a) “brothel“ includes any house, room, conveyance or place, or any portion of any house, room, 
conveyance or place, which is used for purposes of sexual exploitation or abuse for the gain of 
another person or for the mutual gain of two or mor e prostitutes; 
(aa) “child“ means a person who has not completed t he age of sixteen years; 
(b) “corrective institution“ means an institution, by whatever name called (being an institution 
established or licensed as such under Section 21), in which persons, who are in need of 
correction, may be detained under this Act, and inc ludes a shelter where under trials may be kept 
in pursuance of this Act; 
(c) “magistrate“ means a Magistrate specified in th e second column of the Schedule as being 
competent to exercise the powers conferred by the s ection in which the expression occurs and 
which is specified in the first column of the Sched ule; 
(ca) “major“ means a person who has completed the a ge of eighteen years; 
(cb) “minor“ means a person who has completed the a ge of sixteen years but has not completed 
the age of eighteen years; 
(d) “prescribed“ means prescribed by rules made und er this Act; 
(e) [1] [ * * * * * * ]. 
(f) “prostitution“ means the sexual exploitation or  abuse of persons for commercial purposes, and 
the expression “prostitute” shall be construed acco rdingly;  2 (g) “protective home“ means an institution, by what ever name called (being an institution 
established or licensed as such under Section 21), in which persons who are in need of care and 
protection, may be kept under this Act and where ap propriate technically qualified persons, 
equipments and other facilities have been provided but does not include,— 
(i) a shelter where under trials may be kept in pur suance of this Act, or 
(ii) a corrective institution; 
(h) “public place“ means any place intended for use  by, or accessible to, the publicand includes 
any public conveyance; 
(i) “special police officer” means a police officer  appointed by or on behalf of the State 
Government to be in charge of police duties within a specified area for the purpose of this Act; 
(j) “trafficking police officer“ means a police off icer appointed by the Central Government under 
sub-section (4) of Section 13. 
Comments 
Prostitution—Police raid—Nine girls recovered—Enquir y conducted under Sec. 17—Medical 
examination report stating to have had sexual inter course within a week before examination—
Detention order—Appeal—No evidence as to petitioners  living in or carrying on prostitution 
brothel at time of raid—No evidence to prove that pe titioners were seducing any person for the 
purpose of prostitution—Profession of accused state d to be dancing & singing—Held :—Sexual 
intercourse by itself is not an offence—Prostitutio n by itself is not an offence—Petition allowed. 
Kumari Sangeeta v. State and another. 1996 Cr.R. 12 9 (Delhi) 
2-A. Rule of construction regarding enactments not extending to Jammu and Kashmir .—Any 
reference in this Act to a law which is not in forc e in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall in 
relation to that State, be construed as a reference  to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that  
State. 
3. Punishment for keeping a brothel or allowing pre mises to be used as a brothel.— (1) Any 
person who keeps or manages, or acts or assists in the keeping or management of, a brothel, shall 
be punishable on first conviction with rigorous imp risonment for a term of not less than one year 
and not more than three years and also with fine wh ich may extend to two thousand rupees and 
in the event of a second or subsequent to convictio n with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not 
less than two years and not more than five years an d also with fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees. 
(2) a any person who,— 
(a) being the tenant, lessee, occupier or person in  charge of any premises, uses, or knowingly 
allows any other person to use, such premises or an y part thereof as a brothel, or  3 (b) being the owner, lessor or landlord of any prem ises or the agent of such owner, lessor or 
landlord, lets the same or any part thereof with th e knowledge that the same or any part thereof is 
intended to be used as a brothel, or is wilfully a party to the use of such premises or any part 
thereof as a brothel, shall be punishable on first conviction with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years and with fine which fine wh ich may extend to two thousand rupees and 
in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to five years and also with fine. 
(2-A) For the purposes of sub-section (2), it shall  be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that 
any person referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of that sub-section, is knowingly allowing the 
premises or any part thereof to be used as a brothe l or, as the case may be, has knowledge that 
the premises or any part thereof are being used as a brothel, if,— 
(a) a report is published in a newspaper having cir culation in the area in which such person 
resides to the effect that the premises or any part  thereof have been found to be used for 
prostitution as a result of a search made under thi s Act; or 
(b) a copy of the list of all things found during t he search referred to in clause (a) is given to suc h 
person. 
(3) Notwithstanding any thing contained in any othe r law for the time being in force, on 
conviction of any person referred to in clause (a) or clause (d) of sub-section (2) of any offence 
under that sub-section in respect of any premises o r any part thereof, any lease or agreement 
under which such premises have been leased out or h eld or occupied at the time of the 
commission of the offence, shall become void and in operative with effect from the date of the 
said conviction. 
4. Punishment for living on the earnings of prostit ution .—(1) Any person over the age of 
eighteen years who knowingly lives, wholly or in pa rt, on the earnings of the prostitution of any 
other person shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and where such earnings relate 
to the prostitution of a child or a minor, shall be  punishable with imprisonment for a term of not 
less than seven years and not more than ten years. 
(2) Where any person over the age of eighteen years  is proved,— 
(a) to be living with, or to be habitually in the c ompany of, a prostitute; or 
(b) to have exercised control, direction or influen ce over the movements of a prostitute in such a 
manner as to show that such person is aiding abetti ng or compelling her prostitution; or 
(c) to be acting as a tout or pimp on behalf of a p rostitute, it shall be presumed, until the contrary  
is proved, that such person is knowingly living on the earnings of prostitution of another person 
within the meaning of sub-section (1). 
5. Procuring, inducing or taking person for the sak e of prostitution.—(1) Any person who—  4 (a) procures or attempts to procure a person whethe r with or without his/her consent, for the 
purpose of prostitution; or 
(b) induces a person to go from any place, with the  intent that he/she may for the purpose of 
prostitution become the inmate of, or frequent, a b rothel; or 
(c) takes or attempts to take a person or causes a person to be taken, from one place to another 
with a view to his/her carrying on, or being brough t up to carry on prostitution ; or 
(d) causes or induces a person to carry on prostitu tion; 
shall be punishable on conviction with rigorous imp risonment for a term of not less than three 
years and not more than seven years and also with f ine which may extend to two thousand 
rupees, and if any offence under this sub-section i s committed against the will of any person, the 
punishment of imprisonment for a term of seven year s shall extend to imprisonment for a term of 
fourteen years: 
Provided that if the person in respect of whom an o ffence committed under this sub-section,— 
(i) is a child, the punishment provided under this sub-section shall extend to rigorous 
imprisonment for a term of not less than seven year s but may extend to life; and 
(ii) is a minor, the punishment provided under this  sub-section shall extend to rigorous 
imprisonment for a term of not less than seven year s and not more than fourteen years. 
[2] (2) [ **** ** ] 
(3) An offence under this section shall be triable, — 
(a) in the place from which a person is procured, i nduced to go, taken or caused to be taken or 
from which an attempt to procure or taken such pers ons made; or 
(b) in the place to which she may have gone as a re sult of the inducement or to which he/she is 
taken or caused to be taken or an attempt to take h im/her is made. 
6. Detaining a person in premises where prostitutio n is carried on.—(1) Any person who detains 
any other person, whether with or without his conse nt,— 
(a) in any brothel, or 
(b) in or upon any premises with intent that such p erson may have sexual intercourse with a 
person who is not the spouse of such person, shall be punishable on conviction, with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which  shall not be less than seven years but which 
may be for life or for a term which may extend to t en years and shall also be liable to fine:  5 Provided that the court may for adequate and specia l reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years. 
(2) Where any person is found with a child in a bro thel, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary 
is proved, that he has committed an offence under s ub-section (1). 
(2-A) Where a child or minor found in a brothel, is , on medical examination, detected to have 
been sexually abused, it shall be presumed unless t he contrary is proved, that the child or minor 
has been detained for purposes of prostitution or, as the case may be, has been sexually exploited 
for commercial purposes. 
(3) A person shall be presumed to detain a person i n a brothel or in upon any premises for the 
purpose of sexual intercourse with a man other than  her lawful husband, if such person, with 
intent to compel or induce her to remain there,— 
(a) with holds from her any jewellery, wearing appa rel, money or other property belonging to 
her, or 
(b) threatens her with legal proceedings if she tak es away with her any jewellery, wearing 
apparel, money or other property lent or supplied t o her by or by the direction of such person. 
(4) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no suit , prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against such woman or girl at the instance of t he person by whom she has been detained, for 
the recovery of any jewellery, wearing apparel or o ther property alleged to have been lent or 
supplied to or for such woman or girl or to have be en pledged by such woman or girl or for the 
recovery of any money alleged to be payable by such  woman or girl. 
7. Prostitution in or in the vicinity of public pla ce.—(1) Any person who carries on prostituion 
and the person with whom such prostitution is carri ed on, in any premises: 
(a) which are within the area or areas, notified un der sub-section (3), or 
(b) which are within a distance of two hundred mete rs of any place of public religious worship, 
educational institution, hotel, hospital, nursing h ome or such other public place of any kind as 
may be notified in this behalf by the Commissioner of Police or Magistrate in the manner 
prescribed, shall be punishable with imprisonment f or a term which may extend to three months. 
(1-A) Where an offence committed under sub-section (1) is in respect of a child or minor, the 
person committing the offence shall be punishable w ith imprisonment of either description for a 
term which not be less than seven years but which m ay be for life or for a term which may 
extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fin e: 
Provided that the Court may, for adequate and speci al reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of les s than seven years. 
(2) Any person who:  6 (a) being the keeper of any public place knowingly permits prostitutes for purposes of their trade 
to resort to or remain in such place; or 
(b) being the tenant, lessee, occupier or person in  charge of any premises referred to in sub-
section (1) knowingly permits the same or any part thereof to be used for prostitution; or 
(c) being the owner, lessor or landlord of any prem ises referred to in sub-section (1), or the agent 
of such owner, lessor or landlord, lets the same or  any part thereof with the knowledge that the 
same or any part thereof may be used for prostituti on, or is wilfully a party to such use. 
shall be punishable on first conviction with impris onment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to two hundre d rupees, or with both, and in the event of a 
second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment f or a term which may extend to six months 
and also with fine, which may extend to two hundred  rupees, and if the public place or premises 
happen to be a hotel, the license for carrying on t he business of such hotel under any law for the 
time being in force shall also be liable to be susp ended for a period of not less than three months 
but which may extend to one year: 
Provided that if an offence committed under this su b-section is in respect of a child or minor in a 
hotel, such license shall also be liable to be canc elled. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “hotel” shall have the meaning as in clause 
(6) of Section 2 of the Hotel-Receipts Tax Act, 198 0 (54 of 1980). 
(3) The State Government may, having regard to the kinds of persons frequenting any area or 
areas in the State, the nature and the density of p opulation therein and other relevant 
considerations, by notification in the official Gaz ette, direct that the prostitution shall not be 
carried on in such area or areas as may be specifie d in the notification. 
(4) Where the notification is issued under Sub-sect ion (3) in respect of any area or areas, the 
State Government shall define the limits of such ar ea or areas in the notification with reasonable 
certainty. 
(5) No such notification shall be issued so as to ha ve effect from a date earlier than the expiry of 
a period of ninety days after the date on which it is issued. 
8. Seducing or soliciting for purpose of prostituti on.—Whoever, in any public place or within 
sight of, and in such manner as to be seen or heard  from, any public place, whether from within 
any building or house or not: 
(a) by words, gestures, willful exposure of her per son (whether by sitting by a window or on the 
balcony of a building or house or in any other way) , or otherwise tempts or endeavour to tempt, 
or attracts or endeavour to attract the attention o f, any person for the purpose of prostitution; or  7 (b) solicits or molests any person, or loiters or a cts in such manner as to cause obstruction or 
annoyance to persons residing nearby or passing by such public place or to offend against public 
decency, for the purpose of prostitution, 
shall be punishable on first conviction with impris onment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundr ed rupees, or with both, and in the event of a 
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, 
and also with fine which may extend to five hundred  rupees: 
Provided that where an offence under this Section i s committed by a man he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a period of not less than sev en days but which may extend to three 
months. 
9. Seduction of a person in custody.—Any person who  having the custody, charge or care of or 
in a position of authority over any person causes o r aids or abets the seduction for prostitution of 
that shall be punishable on conviction with impriso nment of either description for a term which 
shall not be less than seven years but which may be  for life or for a term which may extend to ten 
years and shall also be liable to fine: 
Provided that the court may, for adequate and speci al reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of les s than seven years. 
[3] [(2) ******* ] 
[4] [10. ******* ] 
10-A. Detention in a corrective institution.—(1) Wh ere,— 
(a) a female offender is found guilty of an offence  under Section 7 or Section 8, and 
(b) the character, state of health and mental condi tion of the offender and the other circumstances 
of the case are such that it is expedient that she should be subject to detention for such term and 
such instruction and discipline as are conducive to  her correction, 
it shall be lawful for the court to pass, in lieu o f a sentence of imprisonment, an order for 
detention in a corrective institution for such term , not being less than two years and not being 
more than five years, as the court thinks fit: 
Provided that before passing such an order,— 
(i) the court shall give an opportunity to the offe nder to be heard and shall also consider any 
representation which the offender may make to the c ourt as to the suitability of the case for 
treatment in such an institution, as also the repor t of the Probation Officer appointed under the 
Probation of Offender Act, 1958; and  8 (ii) the court shall record that it is satisfied th at the character, state of health and mental condit ion 
of the offender and the other circumstances of the case are such that the offender is likely to 
benefit by such instruction and discipline as afore said. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), t he provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, relating to appeal, reference and revision, and of the Limitation Act, 1963 as to 
the period within which an appeal shall be filed, s hall apply in relation to an order of detention 
under sub-section (1) as if the order had been a se ntence of imprisonment for the same period as 
the period for which the detention was ordered. 
(3) Subject to such rules as may be made in this be half, the State Government or authority 
authorised in this behalf may, at any time after th e expiration of six months from the date of an 
order for detention in a corrective institution, if  it is satisfied that there is a reasonable probabi lity 
that the offender will lead a useful and industriou s life, discharge her from such an institution, 
without condition or with such conditions as may be  considered fit, and grant her a written 
licence in such form as may be prescribed. 
(4) The conditions on which an order is discharged under sub-section (3), may include 
requirements relating to residence of the offender and supervision over the offenders activities 
and movements. 
11. Notification of address of previously convicted offenders.—(1) When any person having 
been convicted— 
(a) by a court in India of an offence punishable un der this Act or punishable under Section 363, 
Section 365, Section 366, Section 366-A, Section 36 6-B, Section 367, Section 368, Section 370, 
Section 371, Section 372 or Section 373 of the Indi an Penal Code (45 of 1860), with 
imprisonment for a term of two years or up wards; o r 
(b) by a court or tribunal in any other country of an offence which would, if committed in India, 
have been punishable under this Act, or under any o f the aforesaid sections with imprisonment 
for a like term, 
is within a period of five years after release from  prison, again convicted of any offence 
punishable under this Act or under any of those sec tion with, imprisonment for a term of two 
years or upwards by a court, such court may, if it thinks fit, at the time of passing the sentence of 
imprisonment on such person, also order that his re sidence, and any change of, or absence from, 
such residence, after release, be notified accordin g to rules made under Section 23 for a period 
not exceeding five years from the date of expiratio n of that sentence. 
(2) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or ot herwise, such order shall become void. 
(3) An order under this section may also be made by  an Appellate Court or by the High Court 
when exercising its powers of revision.  9 (4) Any person charged with a breach of any rule re ferred to in sub-section (1) may be tried by a 
Magistrate of competent jurisdiction in the Distric t in which the place last notified as his 
residence is situated. 
[5] [12.****** ] 
13. Special police officer and advisory body .—(1) There shall be for each area to be specified 
by the State Government in this behalf a special po lice officer appointed by or on behalf of that 
government for dealing with offences under this Act  in that area. 
(2) The special police officer shall not be below t he rank of an Inspector of Police. 
(2-A) The District Magistrate may, if he considers it necessary or expedient so to do, confer upon 
any retired police or military officer all or any o f the powers conferred by or under this Act on a 
special police officer, with respect to particular cases or classes of cases or to cases generally: 
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on,—  
(a) a retired police officer unless such officer, a t the time of his retirement, was holding a post 
not below the rank of an inspector; 
(b) a retired military officer unless such officer,  at the time of his retirement, was holding a post 
not below the rank of a commissioned officer. 
(3) For the efficient discharge of his functions in  relation to offences under this Act,— 
(a) the special police officer of an area shall be assisted by such number of subordinate police 
officers (including women police officers wherever practicable) as the State Government may 
think fit; and 
(b) the State Government may associate with the spe cial police officer a non-official advisory 
body consisting of not more than five leading socia l welfare workers of that area (including 
women social welfare workers wherever practicable) to advise him on questions of general 
importance regarding the working of this Act. 
(4) The Central Government may, for the purpose of investigating any offence under this Act or 
under any other law for the time being in force dea ling with sexual exploitation of persons and 
committed in more than one State appoint such numbe r of police officers as trafficking police 
officers and they shall exercise all the powers and  discharge all the functions as are exercisable 
by special police officers under this Act with the modification that they shall exercise such 
powers and discharge such functions in relation to the whole of India. 
14. Offences to be cognizable.—Not with standing any thing contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an offence punishable under this Act shall be deemed to be a 
cognizable offence within the meaning of that Code:   10  Provided that, notwithstanding anything contained i n that Code,— 
(i) arrest without warrant may be made only by the special police officer or under his direction or 
guidance, or subject to his prior approval; 
(ii) when the special police officer requires any o fficer subordinate to him to arrest without 
warrant otherwise than in his presence any person f or an offence under this Act, he shall give 
that subordinate officer an order in writing, speci fying the person to be arrested and the offence 
for which the arrest is being made; and the latter officer before arresting the person shall inform 
him of the substance of the order and, on being req uired by such person, show him the order; 
(iii) any police officer not below the rank of sub- inspector specially authorised by the special 
police officer may, if he has reason to believe tha t on account of delay involved in obtaining the 
order of the special police officer, any valuable e vidence relating to any offence under this Act is 
likely to be destroyed or concealed, or the person who has committed or is suspected to have 
committed the offence is likely to escape, or if th e name and address of such a person is 
unknown or there is reason to suspect that a false name or address has been given, arrest the 
person concerned without such order, but in such a case he shall report, as soon as may be, to the 
special police officer the arrest and the circumsta nces in which the arrest was made. 
15. Search without warrant .—(1) Notwithstanding any thing contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, whenever the special police of ficer or the trafficking police officer as the 
case may be, has reasonable grounds for believing t hat an offence punishable under this Act has 
been or is being committed in respect of a person l iving in any premises, and that search of the 
premises with warrant cannot be made without undue delay, such officer may, after recording the 
grounds of his belief, enter and search such premis es without a warrant. 
(2) Before making a search under sub-section (1), t he special police officer or the trafficking 
police officer, as the case may be shall call upon two or more respectable inhabitants (at least one 
of whom shall be a woman) of the locality in which the place to be searched is situate, to attend 
and witness the search and may issue an order in wr iting to them or any of them so to do: 
Provided that the requirement as to the respectable  inhabitants being from the locality in which 
the place to be searched is situate shall not apply  to a woman required to attend and witness the 
search. 
(3) Any person who, without reasonable cause, refus es or neglects, to attend and witness a search 
under this section, when called upon to do so by an  order in writing delivered or tendered to him, 
shall be deemed to have committed an offence under Section 187 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860). 
(4) The special police officer or the trafficking p olice officer, as the case may be, entering any 
premises under sub-section (1) shall be entitled to  remove therefrom all the persons found 
therein.  11  (5) The special police officer or the trafficking p olice officer, as the case may be, after removing 
person under sub-section (4) shall forthwith produc e her before the appropriate Magistrate. 
(5-A) Any person, who is produced before a Magistra te under sub-section (5), shall be examined 
by a registered medical practitioner for the purpos es of determination of the age of such person, 
or for the detection of any injuries as a result of  sexual abuse or for the presence of any sexually 
transmitted diseases. 
Explanation.—In this sub-section, “registered medic al practitioner” has the same meaning as in 
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956).  
(6) The special police officer or the trafficking p olice officer, as the case may be, and other 
persons taking part in, or attending, and witnessin g a search shall not be liable to any civil or 
criminal proceeding against them in respect of anyt hing lawfully done in connection with, or for 
the purpose of, the search. 
(6-A) The special police officer or the trafficking  police officer, as the case may be, making a 
search under this section shall be accompanied by a t least two women police officers, and where 
any woman or girl removed under sub-section (4) is required to be interrogated it shall be done 
by woman police officer and if no woman police offi cer is available, the interrogation shall be 
done only in the presence of a lady member of a rec ognised welfare institution or organization. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section a nd Section 17-A, “recognised welfare 
institution or organisation” means such institution  or organisation as may be recognised in this 
behalf by the State Government. 
(7) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedur e, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall, so far as may be, 
apply to any search under this section as they appl y to any search made under the authority of a 
warrant issued under 94 of the said Code. 
16. Rescue of person—(1) Where a Magistrate has rea son to believe from information received 
from the police or from any other person authorised  by State Government in this behalf or 
otherwise, that any person is living, or is carryin g, or is being made to carry on, prostitution in a 
brothel, he may direct a police officer not below t he rank of a sub-inspector to enter such brothel, 
and to remove there from such person and produce he r before him. 
(2) The police officer, after removing the person s hall forthwith produce her before the 
Magistrate issuing the order. 
17. Intermediate custody, of persons removed under Section 15 or rescued under Section 16 .—
(1) When the special police officer removing a pers on under sub-section (4) of Section 15 or a 
police officer rescuing a person under sub-section (1) of Section 16, is for any reason unable to 
produce her before the appropriate Magistrate as re quired by sub-section (5) of Section 15, or 
before the Magistrate issuing the order under sub-s ection (2) of Section 16, he shall forthwith 
produce her before the nearest Magistrate of any cl ass, who shall pass such orders as he deems  12  proper for her safe custody until she is produced b efore the appropriate Magistrate, or, as the 
case may be, the Magistrate issuing the order: 
Provided that no person shall be, 
(i) detained in custody under this sub-section for a period exceeding ten days from the date of the 
order under this sub-section; or 
(ii) restored to or placed in the custody of a pers on who may exercise a harmful influence over 
her. 
(2) when the person is produced before the appropri ate Magistrate under sub-section (5) of 
Section 15 or the Magistrate under sub-section (2) of Section 16, he shall, after giving her an 
opportunity of being heard, cause an inquiry to be made as to the correctness of the information 
received under sub-section (1) of Section 16, the a ge, character and antecedents of the person 
and the suitability of her parents, guardian or hus band for taking charge of her and the nature of 
the influence which the conditions in her home are likely to have on her if she is sent home, and, 
for this purpose, he may direct a Probation Officer  appointed under the Probation of Offenders 
Act, 1958, to inquire into the above circumstances and into the personality of the person and the 
prospects of her rehabilitation. 
(3) The Magistrate may, while an inquiry is made in to a case under sub-section (2), pass such 
orders as he deems proper for the safe custody of t he person: 
Provided that where a person rescued under Section 16 is a child or minor, it shall be open to the 
magistrate to place such child or minor in any inst itution established or recognised under any 
Children Act for the time being in force in any Sta te for the safe custody of children: 
Provided further that no person shall be kept in cu stody for this purpose for a period exceeding 
three weeks from the date of such an order, and no person shall be kept in the custody of a 
person likely to have a harmful influence over her.  
(4) Where the Magistrate is satisfied, after making  an inquiry as required under sub-section 
(2),— 
(a) that the information received is correct; and 
(b) that she is in need of care and protection, 
he may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (5 ), make an order that such person be detained 
for such period, being not less than one year and n ot more than three, as may be specified in the 
order, ina protective home, or in such other custod y, as he shall, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, consider suitable: 
Provided that such custody shall not be that of a p erson or body of persons of a religious 
persuasion different from that of the person, and t hat those entrusted with the custody of the  13 person, including the persons in charge of a protec tive home; may be required to enter into a 
bond which may, where necessary and feasible contai ned undertaking based on directions 
relating to the proper care, guardianship, educatio n, training and medical and psychiatric 
treatment of the person as well as supervision by a  person appointed by the Court, which will be 
in force for a period not exceeding three years. 
(5) In discharging his functions under sub-section (2), a Magistrate may summon a panel of five 
respectable persons, three of whom shall, wherever practicable, be women, to assist him; and 
may, for this purpose, keep a list of experienced s ocial welfare workers, particularly women 
social welfare workers, in the field of suppression  of immoral traffic in persons. 
(6) An appeal against an order made under sub-secti on (4) shall lie to the Court of Session whose 
decision on such appeal shall be final. 
17-A. Conditions to be observed before placing pers ons rescued under Section 16 to parents or 
guardians .—Notwithstanding anything contained in su b-section (2) of Section 17, the magistrate 
making an inquiry under Section 17, may, before pas sing an order for handing over any person 
rescued under Section 16 to the parents, guardian o r husband, satisfy himself about the capacity 
or genuineness of the parents, guardian or husband to keep such person by causing an 
investigation to be made by a recognised welfare in stitution or organisation. 
18. Closure of brothel and eviction of offenders fr om the premises .—(1) A Magistrate may, on 
receipt of information from the police or otherwise , that any house, room, place or any portion 
thereof within a distance of two hundred metres of any public place referred to in sub-section (1) 
of Section 7 is being run or used as a brothel by a ny person, or is being used by prostitutes for 
carrying on their trade, issue notice on the owner,  lessor or landlord or such house, room, place 
or portion or the agent of the owner, lessor or lan dlord or on the tenant, lessee, occupier of, or 
any other person in charge of such house, room, pla ce, or portion, to show cause within seven 
days of the receipt of the notice why the same shou ld not be attached for improper use thereof, 
and if, after hearing the person concerned, the Mag istrate is satisfied that the house, room, place 
or portion is being used as a brothel or for carryi ng on prostitution, then the Magistrate may pass 
orders,— 
(a) directing eviction of the occupier within seven  days of the passing of the order from the 
house, room, place, or portion; 
(b) directing that before letting it out during the  period of one year or in a case where a child or 
minor has been found in such house, room, place or portion during a search under Section 15, 
during the period of three years, immediately after  the passing of the order, the owner, lessor or 
landlord or the agent of the owner, lessor or landl ord shall obtain the previous approval of the 
Magistrate; 
Provided that, if the Magistrate finds that the own er, lessor or landlord as well as the agent of the 
owner, lessor or landlord, was innocent of the impr oper user of the house, room, place, or 
portion, he may cause the same to be restored to th e owner, lessor or landlord or the agent of the 
owner, lessor landlord, with a direction that the h ouse, room, place or portion shall not be leased  14  out, or otherwise given possession of, to or for th e benefit of the person who was allowing the 
improper use therein. 
(2) A court convicting a person of any offence unde r Section 3 or Section 7 may pass orders 
under sub-section (1), without further notice to su ch person to show cause as required in that 
sub-section. 
(3) Orders passed by the Magistrate or court under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall not be 
subject to appeal and shall not be stayed or set as ide by the order of any court, civil or criminal, 
and the said orders shall cease to have validity af ter the expiry of one year or three years, as the 
case may be: 
Provided that where a conviction under Section 3 or  Section 7 is set aside on an appeal on the 
ground that such house, room, place, or any portion  thereof is not being run or uses as a brothel 
or is not being used by prostitutes for carrying on  their trade, any order passed by the trial court 
under sub-section (1) shall also be set aside. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, when a 
Magistrate passes an order under sub-section (1), o r a Court passes an order under sub-section 
(2), any lease or a agreement under which the house , room, place or portion is occupied at the 
time shall become void and inoperative. 
(5) When an owner, lessor or landlord, or the agent  of such owner, lessor or landlord fails to 
comply with a direction given under clause (b) of s ub-section (1) he shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees or when he fails to comply with a direction under the 
proviso to that sub-section, he shall be deemed to have committed an offence under clause (b) of 
sub-section (2), of Section 3 or clause (c) of sub- section (2) of Section 7, as the case may be, and 
punished accordingly. 
19. Application for being kept in a protective home  or provided care and protection by court.—
(1) A person who is carrying on, or is being made t o carry on prostitution, may make an 
application, to the Magistrate within the local lim its of whose jurisdiction she is carrying on, or is  
being made to carry on prostitution, for an order t hat she may be— 
(a) kept in a protective home, or 
(b) provided care and protection by the court in th e manner specified in sub-section (3). 
(2) The Magistrate may pending inquiry under sub-se ction (3) direct that the person be kept in 
such custody as he may consider proper, having rega rd to the circumstances of the case. 
(3) If the Magistrate after hearing the applicant a nd making such inquiry as he may consider 
necessary, including an inquiry by a Probation Offi cer appointed under the Probation of Offender 
Act, 1958, (20 of 1958) into the personality, condi tions of home and prospects of rehabilitation 
of the applicant, is satisfied that an order should  be made under this section, he shall for reasons 
to be recorded, make an order that the applicant to  be kept:  15  (i) in a protective home, or 
(ii) in a corrective institution, or 
(iii) under the supervision of a person appointed b y the Magistrate for such period as may be 
specified in the order. 
20. Removal of prostitute from any place.—(1) A Mag istrate on receiving information that any 
person residing in or frequenting any place within the local limits of his jurisdiction is a 
prostitute, may record the substance of the informa tion received and issue a notice to such person 
requiring her to appear before the Magistrate and s how cause why she should not be required to 
remove herself from the place and be prohibited for m re-entering it. 
(2) Every notice issued under sub-section (1) shall  be accompanied by a copy of the record 
aforesaid, and the copy shall be served along with the notice on the person against whom the 
notice is issued. 
(3) The Magistrate shall, after the service of the notice referred to in sub-section (2), proceed to 
inquire into the truth of the information received,  and after giving the person an opportunity of 
adducing evidence; take such further evidence as he  thinks fit and if upon such inquiry it appears 
to him that such person is a prostitute and that it  is necessary in the interest of the general public  
that such person should be required to remove herse lf there from and be prohibited from re-
entering the same, the Magistrate shall, by order i n writing communicate to the person in the 
manner specified therein, require her after a date (to be specified in the order) which shall not be 
less than seven days from the date of the order, to  remove herself from the place to such place 
whether within or without the local limits of his j urisdiction, by such route or routes and within 
such time as may be specified in the order and also  prohibit her from re-entering the place 
without the permission in writing of the Magistrate  having jurisdiction over such place. 
(4) Whoever,— 
(a) fails to comply with an order issued under this  section, within the period specified therein, or 
whilst an order prohibiting her from re-entering a place without permission is in force, re-enters 
the place without such permission, or 
(b) knowing that any person has, under this section , been required to remove herself from the 
place and has not obtained the requisite permission  to re-enter it, harbours or conceals such 
person in the place, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees and in 
the case of a continuing offence with an additional  fine which may extend to twenty rupees for 
every day after the first during which she or he ha s persisted in the offence. 
21. Protective homes.— (1) The State Government may  in its discretion establish as many 
protective homes and corrective institutions under this Act as it thinks fit and such homes and 
institutions when established shall be maintained i n such manner as may be prescribed.  16  (2) No person or no authority other than the State g overnment shall, after the commencement of 
this Act, establish or maintain any protective home  or corrective institution except under and in 
accordance with the conditions of, a licence issued  under this section by the State Government. 
(3) The State Government may, on application made t o it in this behalf by a person or authority, 
issue to such person or authority a licence in the prescribed form for establishing and 
maintaining or as the case may be, for maintaining a protective home or corrective institution and 
a licence so issued may contain such conditions as the State Government may think fit to impose 
in accordance with the rules made under this Act: 
Provided that any such condition may require that t he management of the protective home or 
corrective institution shall, wherever practicable,  be entrusted to women: 
Provided further that a person or authority maintai ning any protective home at the 
commencement of this Act shall be allowed a period of six months from such commencement to 
make an application for such licence: 
Provided also that a person or authority maintainin g any corrective institution at the 
commencement of the Suppression of Immoral Traffic in Women and Girls (Amendment) Act, 
1978, shall be allowed a period of six months from such commencement to make an application 
for such licence. 
(4) Before issuing a licence, the State Government may require such officer or authority as it 
may appoint for this purpose, to make a full and co mplete investigation in respect of the 
application received in this behalf and report to i t the result of such investigation and in making 
any such investigation the officer or authority sha ll allow such procedure as may be prescirbed. 
(5) A licence, unless sooner revoked, shall remain in force for such period as may be specified in 
the licence and may, on application made in this be half atleast thirty days before the date of its 
expiration, be renewed for a like period. 
(6) No licence issued or renewed under this Act shal l be transferable. 
(7) Where any person or authority to whom a licence  has been granted under this Act or any 
agent or servant of such person or authority commit s a breach of any of the conditions thereof or 
any of the provisions of this Act or of any of the rules made under this Act, or where the State 
Government is not satisfied with the conditions, ma nagement or superintendence or any 
protective home or corrective institution the State  Government may, without prejudice to any 
other penalty which may have been incurred under th is Act, for reasons to be recorded, revoke 
the licence by order in writing: 
Provided that no such order shall be made until an opportunity is given to the holder of the 
licence to show cause why the licence shall not be revoked.  17  (8) Where a licence in respect of a protective home  or corrective institution has been revoked 
under the foregoing sub-section such protective hom e or corrective institution shall cease to 
function from the date of, such revocation. 
(9) Subject to any rule that may be made in this be half, the State Government may also vary or 
amend any licence issued or renewed under this Act.  
(9-A) The State Government or any authority authori sed by it in this behalf may, subject to any 
rules that may be made in this behalf, transfer an inmate of a protective home to another 
protective home or to a corrective institution or a n inmate of a corrective institution to another 
corrective institution or to a protective home, whe re such transfer is considered desirable having 
regard to the conduct of the person to be transferr ed, the kind of training to be imparted and other 
circumstances of the case: 
Provided that,— 
(i) no person who is transferred under this sub-sec tion shall be required to stay in the home or 
institution to which she is transferred for a perio d longer than she was required to stay in the 
home or institution from which she was transferred;  
(ii) reasons shall be recorded for every order of t ransfer under this sub-section. 
(10) Whoever establishes or maintains a protective home or corrective institution except in 
accordance with the provisions of this section, sha ll be punishable in the case of a first offence 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees a nd in the case of second or subsequent 
offence with imprisonment for a term which may exte nd to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
21-A. Production of records .—Every person or autho rity who is licensed under sub-section (3) 
of Section 21 to establish or maintain, or, as the case may be, for maintaining, a protective home 
or corrective institution shall whenever required b y a Court, produce the records and other 
documents maintained by such home or institution be fore such court. 
22. Trials .—No Court, inferior to that of a Metropo litan Magistrate or a Judicial magistrate of 
the first class, shall try any offence under Sectio n 3, Section 4, Section 5, Section 6, Section 7 or 
Section 8. 
22-A. Power to establish special Courts.—(1) If the  State Government is satisfied that it is 
necessary for the purpose of providing for speedy t rial of offences under this Act in any district 
or metropolitan area, it may, by notification in th e official Gazette and after consultation with the 
High Court, establish one or more Courts of Judicia l Magistrates of the first class, or, as the case 
may be, Metropolitan Magistrate, in such district o r metropolitan area. 
(2) Unless otherwise directed by the High Court, a court established under sub-section (1) shall 
exercise jurisdiction only in respect of cases unde r this Act.  18  (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), t he jurisdiction and powers of the presiding 
officer of a court established under sub-section (1 ) in any district or metropolitan area shall 
extend throughout the district or the metropolitan area, as the case may be. 
(4) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this sec tion, a Court established under sub-section (1) 
in any district or metropolitan area shall be deeme d to be a court established under sub-section 
(1) of Section 11, or, as the case may be, sub-sect ion (1) of Section 16 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and provisions of the C ode shall apply accordingly in relation to 
such courts. 
Explanation.—In this section, “High Court” has the same meaning as in clause (e) of Section 2 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
[6] [22-AA. Power of Central Government to establis h special courts.—(1) If the Central 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary for th e purpose of providing for speedy trial of 
offences under this Act and committed in more than one State, it may, by notification in the 
official Gazette and after consultation with the Hi gh Court concerned, establish one or more 
courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class o r Metropolitan Magistrates for the trial of such 
offences. 
(2) The provisions of Section 22-A, shall, so far a s may be, apply to the courts established under 
sub-section (1), as they apply to Courts establishe d under that section. 
22-B. Power of court to try cases summarily .—Notwi thstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the State Government m ay, if it considers it necessary so to do, 
direct that offences under this Act shall be tried in a summary way by a Magistrate including the 
presiding officer of a court established under sub- section (1) of Section 22-A and the provisions 
of Section 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the said Code, shall, as far as may be, apply to such 
trial: 
Provided that in the case of any conviction in a su mmary trial under this section, it shall be 
lawful for the Magistrate to pass a sentence of imp risonment for a term not exceeding one year: 
Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under 
this section, it appears to the Magistrate that the  nature of the case is such that a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year may have  to be passed or that it is, for any other 
reason, undesirable to try the case summarily, the Magistrate shall, after hearing the parties 
record an order to that effect and thereafter recal l any witness, who may have been examined and 
proceed to hear or re-hear the case in the manner p rovided by the said Code]. 
23. Power to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying on the purposes of  this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gen erality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for :  19  (a) the notification of any place as a public place ; 
(b) the placing in custody of persons for whose saf e custody orders have been passed under sub-
section (1) of Section 17 and their maintenance; 
(bb) the discharge of an offender under sub-section  (3) of Section 10-A from a corrective 
institution and the form of licence to be granted t o such offender; 
(c) the detention and keeping in protective homes o r, as the case may be, in corrective 
institutions or person under this Act and their mai ntenance; 
(d) the carrying out of the provisions of Section 1 1 regarding notification of residence or change 
of or absence from residence by released convicts; 
(e) the delegation of authority to appoint the spec ial police officer under sub-section (1) of 
Section 13; 
(f) the carrying into effect of the provisions of S ection 18; 
(g) (i) the establishment, maintenance, management and superintendence of protective homes 
and corrective institutions under Section 21 and th e appointment, powers and duties of persons 
employed in such home or institution; 
(ii) the form in which an application for a licence  may be made and the particulars to be 
contained in such application; 
(iii) the procedure for the issue or renewal of a l icence, the time within which such licence shall 
be issued or renewed and the procedure to be follow ed in making a full and complete 
investigation in respect of an application for lice nce; 
(iv) the form of a licence and the condition to be specified therein; 
(v) the manner in which the accounts of a protectiv e home and a corrective institution shall be 
maintained and audited; 
(vi) the maintenance of registers and statements by  a licensee and the form of such registers and 
statements; 
(vii) the care, treatments, maintenance, training, instruction, control and discipline of the inmates 
of protective home and corrective institutions; 
(viii) the visits to and communications with inmate s; 
(ix) the temporary detention of persons sentenced t o detention in protective homes or in 
corrective institution until arrangements are made for sending them to suchhomes or institutions;  20  (x) the transfer of an inmate from: 
(a) protective home to another, or to a corrective institution, 
(b) one corrective institution to another, or to a protective home, under sub-section (9-A) of 
Section 21; 
(xi) the transfer in pursuance of an order of the C ourt from a protective home or a corrective 
institution to a prison of a person found to be inc orrigible or exercising bad influence upon other 
inmates of the protective home or the corrective in stitution and the period of her detention in 
such prison; 
(xii) the transfer to a protective home or correcti ve institution of persons sentenced under Section 
7 or Section 8 and the period of their detention in  such home or institution; 
(xiii) the discharge of inmates from a protective h ome or corrective institution either absolutely 
or subject to conditions, and their arrest in the e vent of breach of such conditions; 
(xiv) the grant of permission to inmates to absent themselves for short periods; 
(xv) the inspection of protective homes and correct ive institutions and other institutions in which 
a persons may be kept, detained and maintained; 
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may be pre scribed. 
(3) In making any rule under clause (d) or clause ( g) or sub-section (2), the State Government 
may provide that a breach thereof be punishable wit h fine which may extend to two hundred and 
fifty rupees. 
(4) All rules made under this Act shall, as soon as  may be after they are made, be laid before the 
State Legislature. 
24. Act not to be in derogation of certain other Ac ts .—Nothing in this Act shall be construed to 
be in derogation of the provisions of the Reformato ry Schools Act, 1897 or any State Act 
enacted in modification of the said Act or otherwis e, relating to juvenile offenders. 
25. Repeal and savings .—(1) As from the date of th e coming into force in any State of the 
provisions other than Section 1 of this Act, all St ate Acts relating to suppression of immoral 
traffic in persons or to the prevention of prostitu tion, in force in that State immediately before 
such date shall stand repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal by this Act, of any State Act referred to in sub-section (1), 
anything done or any action taken including any dir ection given in any register, rule or order 
made, any restriction imposed) under the provision of such State Act shall in so far as such thing 
or action is not inconsistent with the provisions o f this Act be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the provisions of this Act as if the said pro visions were in force when such thing was done  21  or such action was taken and shall continue in forc e accordingly until superseded by anything 
done or any action taken under this Act. 
Explanation.—In this section, the expression `State  Act `includes a `Provincial Act$. 
THE SCHEDULE [See Section 2(c)] 
Section Magistrate competent to exercise the powers  
7(1) District Magistrate. 
11 (4) Metropolitan Magistrate of Judicial Magistra te of the first class. 
12 (4) [7][* * * * * * * * * * * *] 
15(5) Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the first class, District Magistrate or Sub-
divisional Magistrate. 
16 Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the first class, District Magistrate or Sub-
divisional Magistrate. 
18 District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate . 
19 Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the first class, District Magistrate or Sub-
divisional Magistrate. 
20 District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate o r any Executive Magistrate specially 
empowered by the State Government. 
22-B Metropolitan Magistrate of Judicial Magistrate  of the first class. 
========================== 
[1] Sub-section (e) omitted by Act No 46 of 1978. 
[2] Sub-sec. (2) omitted by Act No. 44 of 1986. 
[3] Sub-section (2) omitted by Act No. 44 of 1986. 
[4] Sec. 10 omitted by Act No. 44 of 1986. 
[5] Section 12 omitted by Act No. 44 of 1986. 
[6] Ins. by Act No. 44 of 1986 (w.e.f. 26-1-1987). 
[7] Figures and words omitted by Act No. 44 of 1986 (w.e.f. 2-6-1987). 1 
 THE INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN (PROHIBITION) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 60 OF 1986  
[23rd December , 1986 .] 
An Act to prohibit indecent representation of women through advertisements or in publications, 
writings, paintings, figures or in any other manner and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indecent Representation 
of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, u nless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “advertisement ” includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other document and also 
includes any visible representation made by means of any light, sound, smoke or gas;  
(b) “distribution ” includes distribution by way of samples whether free or otherwise;  
(c) “indecent representation of women ” means the depiction in any manner of the figure of a 
woman, her form or body or any part thereof in such a way as to have the effect of being indecen t, or 
derogatory to, or denigrating , women, or is likely to deprave, corrupt or injure the public morality or 
morals;  
(d) “label” means any written, marked, stamped, printed or graphic matter, affixed to, or 
appearing upon, any package;  
(e) “package” inclu des a box, carton, tin or other container;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
3. Prohibition of advertisements containing indecent representation of women .—No person shall 
publish, or cause to be published, or arrange or take part in the publication or exhibition of, any 
advertisement which contains indecent representation of women in any form.  
4. Prohibition of publication or sending by post of books, pamphlets, etc., containing indecent 
representation of women .—No person shal l produce or cause to be produced, sell, let to hire, distribute, 
circulate or send by post any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph, 
representation or figure which contains indecent representation of women in any form : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to — 
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photog raph, representation 
or figure— 
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the  
ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph, 
representation or figure is in the interest of science, literature, art, or learning or other objects of 
general concern; or  
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide  for religious purposes;  
  
                                                           
1. 2nd October, 1987, vide notification No  G.S.R. 821(E), dated 25th Septembe r, 1987,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,           
Part II,  sec. 3( i). 2 
 (b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented on or in — 
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monument and Archaeological 
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1958); or  
(ii) any t emple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any 
religious purpose;  
(c) any film in respect of which the provisions of Part II of the Cinematograph Act, 1952                 
(37 of 1952), will be applicable.  
5. Powers to enter  and search .—(1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, any Gazetted 
Officer authorised by the State Government may, within the local limits of the area  for which he is so 
authorised, — 
(a) enter and search at all reasonable times, with such assistance, if any, as he considers 
necessary, any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is 
being committed;  
(b) seize any advertisement or any book, pamphlet, paper, slide film, writing, drawing, painting, 
photograph, representation or figure which he has reason to believe contravenes any of the provisions 
of this Act;  
(c) examine any record, register, document or any other material object found in any place 
mentioned in clause ( a) and seize the same if he has r eason to believe that it may furnish evidence of 
the commission of an offence punishable under this Act:  
Provided that no entry under this sub -section shall be made into a private dwelling house without a 
warrant:  
Provided further that the power of seizure  under this sub -section may be exercised in respect of any 
document, article or thing which contains any such advertisement, including the contents, if any, of such 
document, article or thing, if the advertisement cannot be separated by reason of its being  embossed or 
otherwise from such document, article or thing without affecting the integrity, utility or saleable value 
thereof.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seizure under this Act as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of 
a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.  
(3) Where any person seizes anything under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), he shall, as 
soon as may be, infor m the nearest Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof.  
6. Penalty .—Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall be  punishable 
on first conviction  with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and 
with fine which may extend two thousand rupees , and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction 
with imprisonment for a term of not less than six months but which may extend to five years and also 
with a fine not less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
7. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person, who, at the time the offen ce was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offe nce. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on th e part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 3 
 officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sec tion,— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm . 
8. Offences to be cognizable and bailable .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an offence punishable under this Act shall be bailable.  
(2) An offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.  
9. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution  or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or any State Government or any officer of the Central Government or any 
State Government for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
10. Power to make r ules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the seizure of advertisements or other articles shall be made, and the 
manner in which the seizure list shall be prepared and delivered to the person from whose custody 
any advertisement or other articl e has been seized;  
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Par liament, while it is in session  for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making an y modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without  prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  1 
 THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE  
3. Definitions of domestic violence.  
 
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND  DUTIES OF PROTECTION OFFICERS , SERVICE PROVIDERS, ETC.  
4. Information to Protection Officer and exclusion of liability of informant.  
5. Duties of police officers, service providers and Magistrate.  
6. Duties of shelter homes.  
7. Duties of medical facilities.  
8. Appointment of Protection Officers.  
9. Duties and functions of Protection Officers.  
10. Service providers.  
11. Duties of Government.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING ORDERS OF RELIEFS  
12. Application of Magistrate.  
13. Service of notice.  
14. Counsel ling. 
15. Assistance of welfare expert.  
16. Proceedings to be held in camera . 
17. Right to reside in a shared household.  
18. Protection orders.  
19. Residence orders.  
20. Monetary reliefs.  
21. Custody orders.  
22. Compensation orders.  
23. Power to grant interim and ex parte orders.  
24. Court to give copies of order free of cost.  
25. Duration of orders.  
26. Relief in other suits and legal proceedings.  
27. Jurisdiction.  
28. Procedure.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
29. Appeal.  
 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
30. Protection Officers and members of service providers to be public servants.  
31. Penalty for breach of protection order by respondent.  
32. Cognizance and proof.  
33. Penalty for not discharging duty by Protection Officers.  
34. Cognizance of offence committed by Protection Officer.  
35. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
36. Act not in derogation of any other law . 
37. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
  3 
 THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005  
ACT NO. 43 OF 2005  
[13th September , 2005.]  
An Act to provide for more effective protection of the rights of women guaranteed under the  
Constitution who are victims of violence of any kind occurring within the family and 
formatters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent  and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Protection of Women  
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “aggrieved person ” means any woman who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship with  
the respondent and who alleges to have been subjected to any act of domestic violence by the  
respondent;  
(b) “child” means any person below the age of eighteen years and includes any adopted, step or  
foster child;  
(c) “compensation order ” means an order grante d in terms of section 22;  
(d) “custody order ” means an order granted in terms of section 21;  
(e) “domestic incident report ” means a report made in the prescribed form on receipt of a  
complaint of domestic violence from an aggrieved person;  
(f) “domestic re lationship ” means a relationship between two persons who live or have, at any  
point of time, lived together in a shared household, when they are related by consanguinity,  marriage, 
or through a relationship in the nature of marriage, adoption or are family  members  living together as 
a joint family;  
(g) “domestic violence ” has the same meaning as assigned to it in section 3;  
(h) “dowry” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2 of the Dowry  Prohibition 
Act, 1961 (28 of 1961);  
(i) “Magistrate ” means the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, or as the case may be, the  
Metropolitan Magistrate, exercising jurisdiction under the Code of Criminal Procedure,                      
1973(2 of 1974) in the area where the aggrieved person resides tempor arily or otherwise or the  
respondent resides or the domestic violence is alleged to have taken place;  
(j) “medical facility ” means such facility as may be notified by the State Government to be a  
medical facility for the purposes of this Act;  
(k) “monetary  relief” means the compensation which the Magistrate may order the respondent  to 
pay to the aggrieved person, at any stage during the hearing of an application seeking any  relief under 
this Act, to meet the expenses incurred and the losses suffered by the aggrieved  person as a result of 
the domestic violence;  
(l) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression  
“notified” shall be construed accordingly;  
(m) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
                                                           
1. 26th October, 2006, vide notification No. S.O. 1776(E), dated by 17th October, 2006, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3(ii). 4 
 (n) “Protection Officer ” means an officer appointed by the State Government under                    
sub-section  (1) of section 8;  
(o) “protection order ” means an order made in terms of section 18;  
(p) “residence order ” means an order granted in terms of su b-section ( 1) of section 19;  
(q) “respondent ” means any adult male person who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship  
with the aggrieved person and against whom the aggrieved person has sought any relief under  this 
Act: 
Provided that an aggrieved wife or female living in a relationship in the nature of a marriage  may 
also file a complaint against a relative of the husband or the male partner;  
(r) “service provider ” means an entity registered under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(s) “shared household ” means a household where the person aggrieved lives or at any stage has  
lived in a domestic relationship either singly or along with the respondent and includes such a  house  
hold whether owned or tenanted either jointly by the aggrieved person and the  respond ent, or owned 
or tenanted by either of them in respect of which either the aggrieved  person or the respondent or both 
jointly or singly have any right, title, interest or equity and  includes such a household which may 
belong to the joint family of which th e respondent is a  member, irrespective of whether the 
respondent or the aggrieved person has any right, title or  interest in the shared household;  
(t) “shelter home ” means any shelter home as may be notified by the State Government to be as  
helter home for  the purposes of this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE  
3. Definition of domestic violence. —For the purposes of this Act, any act, omission or  commission 
or conduct of the respondent shall constitut e domestic violence in case it — 
(a) harms or injures or endangers the health, safety, life, limb or well -being, whether mental or  
physical, of the aggrieved person or tends to do so and includes causing physical abuse, sexual  abuse, 
verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse; or  
(b) harasses, harms, injures or endangers the aggrieved person with a view to coerce her or any  
other person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any dowry or other property or  valuable 
security; or  
(c) has the effect of threatening the aggrieved person or any person related  to her by any  conduct 
mentioned in clause ( a) or clause ( b); or 
(d) otherwise injures or causes harm, whether physical or mental, to the aggrieved person.  
Explanation  I.—For the purposes of this section, — 
(i) “physical abuse ” means any act or conduct which is of such a nature as to cause bodily 
pain,  harm, or danger to life, limb, or health or impair the health or development of the aggrieved  
person and includes assault, criminal intimidation and criminal force;  
(ii) “sexual a buse” includes any conduct of a sexual nature that abuses, humiliates, degrades 
or otherwise violates the dignity of woman;  
(iii) “verba l and emotional abuse ” includes— 
(a) insults, ridicule, humiliation, name calling and insults or ridicule specially with  regard 
to not having a child or a male child; and  
(b) repeated threats to cause physical pain to any person in whom the aggrieved person is  
interested;  
(iv) “economic abuse ” include s— 
(a) deprivation of all or any economic or financial resources to which the aggrieved 
person is  entitled under any law or custom whether payable under an order of a court or 
otherwise or  which the aggrieved person requires out of necessity including, but not limited 5 
 to, house  hold necessities for the aggrieved person and her children, if any, stridhan , 
property, jointly or  separately owned by the aggrieved person, payment of rental related to 
the shared house  hold and maintenance;  
(b) disposal of household effects, any alienation of  assets whether movable or 
immovable,  valuables, shares, securities, bonds and the like or other property in which the 
aggrieved person  has an interest or is entitled to use by virtue of the domestic relationship or 
which may be  reasonably required by the aggrieved person or her children or her stridhan  or 
any other  property jointly or separately held by the aggrieved person; and  
(c) prohibition or restriction to continued access to resources or facilities which the 
aggrieved  person is entitled to use or en joy by virtue of the domestic relationship including 
access to the  shared household.  
Explanation II.—For the purpose of determining whether any act, omission, commission or  conduct 
of the respondent constitutes “domestic violence ” under this section, the overall facts  and circumstances 
of the case shall be taken into consideration.  
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND DUTIES OF  PROTECTION OFFICERS , SERVICE PROVIDERS, ETC. 
4. Information to Protection Officer and exclu sion of liability of informa nt.—(1) Any person  
who has reason to believe that an act of domestic violence has been, or is being, or is likely to  be 
committed, may give information about it to the concerned Protection Officer.  
(2) No liability, civil or criminal, shall be incurred by any person for giving in good faith of  
information for the purpose of sub -section ( 1). 
5. Duties of police officers, service providers and Magistrate .—A police officer, Protection  
Officer, service provider or Magistrate who has received a complaint of domestic violence or is  otherwise 
present at the place of an incident of domestic violence or when the incident of  domestic violence is 
reported to him, sh all inform the aggrieved person — 
(a) of her right to make an application for obtaining a relief by wa y of a protection order, an  order 
for monetary relief, a custody order, a residence order, a compensation order or more  than one such 
order under this Act;  
(b) of the availability of services of service providers;  
(c) of the availability of services of the  Protection Officers;  
(d) of her right to free legal services under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of  1987);  
(e) of her right to file a complaint under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code                               
(45 of 1860),wherever relevant:  
Provided that nothing in this Act shall be construed in any manner as to relieve a police officer  
from his duty to proceed in accordance with law upon receipt of information as to the  commission of 
a cognizable offence.  
6. Duties of shelter homes .—If an aggrieved person or on her behalf a Protection Officer or a  service 
provider requests the person in charge of a shelter home to provide shelter to her, such  person in charge of 
the shelter home shall provide shelter to the aggrieved person in the s helter  home.  
7. Duties of medical facilities. —If an aggrieved person or, on her behalf a Protection Officer or a  
service provider requests the person in charge of a medical facility to provide any medical aid  to her, such 
person in charge of the medical facility shall provide medical aid to the aggrieved  person in the medical 
facility.  
8. Appo intment of Protection Officers. —(1) The State Government shall, by notification,  appoint 
such number of Protection Officers in each district as it may consider necessary and  shall also notify the 
area or areas within which a Protection Officer shall exercise the powers  and perform the duties conferred 
on him by or under this Act.  6 
 (2) The Protection Officers shall as far as possible be women and shall possess such  qualifications 
and experience as may be prescribed.  
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Protection Officer and the other officers  subordinate to 
him shall be such as may be prescribed.  
9. Duties and fu nctions of Protection Officers .—(1) It shal l be the  duty of the Protection Officer — 
(a) to assist the Magistrate in the discharge of his functions under this Act;  
(b) to make a domestic incident report to the Magistrate, in such form and in such manner as  may 
be prescribed, upon receipt of a complaint of domestic violence and forward copies  thereof to the 
police officer in charge of the police station within the local limits of whose  jurisdiction domestic 
violence is alleged to have been committed and to the service providers  in that area;  
(c) to make an application in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed to the  
Magistrate, if the aggrieved person so desires, claiming relief for issuance of a protection  order;  
(d) to ensure that the aggrieved person is provided legal aid under the Legal Services  Authorities 
Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) and make available free of cost the prescribed form in  which a complaint is to 
be made;  
(e) to maintain a list of all service providers providing legal aid or counsel ling, shelter homes  and 
medical faciliti es in a local area within the jurisdiction of the Magistrate;  
(f) to make available a safe shelter home, if the aggrieved person so requires and forward a  copy 
of his report of having lodged the aggrieved person in a shelter home to the police station  and the 
Magistrate having jurisdiction in the area where the shelter home is situated;  
(g) to get the aggrieved person medically examined, if she has sustained bodily injuries and  
forward a copy of the medical report to the police station and the Magistrate ha ving jurisdiction  in the 
area where the domestic violence is alleged to have been taken place;  
(h) to ensure that the order for monetary relief under section 20 is complied with and executed,  in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of  1974);  
(i) to perform such other duties as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Protection Officer shall be under the control and supervision of the Magistrate, and  shall 
perform the duties imposed on him by the Magistrate and the Gove rnment by, or under,  this Act.  
10. Service providers. —(1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, any voluntary  
association registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or a company  registered 
under the Companies Act, 195 6 (1 of 1956) or any other law for the time being in  force with the objective 
of protecting the rights and interests of women by any lawful means  including providing of legal aid, 
medical, financial or other assistance shall register itself with  the State Government as a service provider 
for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) A service provider registered under sub -section (1) shall have the power to — 
(a) record the domestic incident report in the prescribed form if the aggrieved person so desires  
and forward a copy thereof to the Magistrate and the Protection Officer having jurisdiction in  the area 
where the domestic violence took place;  
(b) get the aggrieved person medically examined and forward a copy of the medical repot to  the 
Protection Officer and the poli ce station within the local limits of which the domestic  violence took 
place;  
(c) ensure that the aggrieved person is provided shelter in a shelter home, if she so requires and  
forward a report of the lodging of the aggrieved person in the shelter home to the police station  within 
the local limits of which the domestic violence took place.  
(3) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any service provider or any  
member of the service provider who is, or who is deemed to be, acting or purporting to act  under this Act, 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in the exercise  of powers or discharge of 
functions under this Act towards the prevention of the commission of  domestic violence.  7 
 11. Duties of Government .—The Central Government and every State Government, shall take all  
measures to ensure that — 
(a) the provisions of this Act are given wide publicity through public media including the  
television, radio and the print media at regular intervals;  
(b) the Central Government and State Government officers including the police officers and the  
members of the judicial services are given periodic sensitization and awareness training on the  issues 
addressed by this Act;  
(c) effective co -ordination between the services pr ovided by concerned Ministries and  
Departments dealing with law, home affairs including law and order, health and human  resources to 
address issues of domestic violence is established and periodical review of the  same is conducted;  
(d) protocols for the va rious Ministries concerned with the delivery of services to women under  
this Act including the courts  are prepared and put in place.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE FOR OBTAININGORDERS OF RELIEFS  
12. Application to Magistrate. —(1) An aggrieved person or a Protection Officer or any other  person 
on behalf of the aggrieved person may present an application to the Magistrate seeking  one or more 
reliefs under this Act:  
Provided that before passing any order on such application, the Magistrate shall take into  
consideration any domestic incident report received by him from the Protection Officer or the  service 
provider.  
(2) The relief sought for under sub -section ( 1) may include a relief for issuance of an order for  
payment of compensation or damages without prejudice to the right of such person to institute  a suit for 
compensation or damages for the injuries caused by the acts of domestic violence  committed by the 
respondent:  
Provided that where a decree for any amount as compensation or damages has been passed by  any 
court i n favour of the aggrieved person, the amount, if any, paid or payable in pursuance of  the order 
made by the Magistrate under this Act shall be set off against the amount payable  under such decree and 
the decree shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or 
any other law for the time being in force, be executable  for the balance amount, if any, left after such set 
off. 
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and contain such particula rs as may 
be prescribed or as nearly as possible thereto.  
(4) The Magistrate shall fix the first date of hearing, which shall not ordinarily be beyond three  days 
from the date of receipt of the application by the court.  
(5) The Magistrate shall Endeavour to dispose of every application made under sub -section ( 1) within 
a period of sixty days from  the date of its first hearing.  
13. Service of notice. —(1) A notice of the date of hearing fixed under section 12 shall be given  by 
the Magistrate to the Protectio n Officer, who shall get it served by such means as may be  prescribed on 
the respondent, and on any other person, as directed by the Magistrate within a  maximum period of two 
days or such further reasonable time as may be allowed by the  Magistrate from the  date of its receipt.  
(2) A declaration of service of notice made by the Protection Officer in such form as may be  
prescribed shall be the proof that such notice was served upon the respondent and on any other  person as 
directed by the Magistrate  unless th e contrary is proved.  
14. Counse lling.—(1) The Magistrate may, at any stage of the proceedings under this Act, direct the 
respondent or  the aggrieved person, either singly or jointly, to undergo counselling with any member of a  
service provider who possess  such qualifications and experience in counselling as may be  prescribed.  
(2) Where the Magistrate has issued any direction under sub -section ( 1), he shall fix the next  date of 
hearing of the case within a period not exceeding two months.  8 
 15. Assistance of welfare expert .—In any proceeding under this Act, the Magistrate may secure  the 
services of such person, preferably a woman, whether related to the aggrieved person or  not, including a 
person engaged in promoting family welfare as he thinks fit, for the pu rpose of  assisting him in 
discharging his functions.  
16. Pr oceedings to be held in camera. —If the Magistrate considers that the circumstances of the  
case so warrant, and if either party to the proceedings so desires, he may conduct the  proceedings under 
this Act in camera . 
17. Right t o reside in a shared household. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other  
law for the time being in force, every woman in a domestic relationship shall have the right to  reside in 
the shared household, whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial interest in  the same.  
(2) The aggrieved person shall not be evicted or excluded from the shared household or any  part of it 
by the respondent save in accordance with th e procedure established by law.  
18. Protection or ders.—The Magistrate may, after giving the aggrieved person and the  respondent 
an opportunity of being heard and on being prima facie  satisfied that domestic  violence has taken place or 
is likely to take place, pass a protection order in favo ur of the  aggrieved person a nd prohibit the 
respondent from — 
(a) committing any act of domestic violence;  
(b) aiding or abetting in the commission of acts of domestic violence;  
(c) entering the place of employment of the aggrieved person or, if the person aggrieved is a 
child, its school or any other place frequented by the aggrieved person;  
(d) attempting to communicate in any form, whatsoever, with the aggrieved person, including  
personal, oral or written or electronic or telephonic contact;  
(e) alienating any asse ts, operating bank lockers or bank accounts used or held or enjoyed by  both 
the parties, jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent or singly by the  respondent, including 
her stridhan or any other property held either jointly by the parties or  separately by them without the 
leave of the Magistrate;  
(f) causing violence to the dependants, other relatives or any person who give the aggrieved  
person assistance from domestic violence;  
(g) committing any other act as spe cified in the protection order.  
19. Residence orders. —(1) While disposing of an application under sub -section ( 1) of section12, the 
Magistrate may, on being satisfied that domestic violence has taken place, pass a  residence order — 
(a) restraining the respondent from dispossessing or in any other manner disturbing the  
possession of the aggrieved person from the shared household, whether or not the respondent  has a 
legal or equitable interest in the shared household;  
(b) directing the respondent to remove himself from the shared household;  
(c) restraining the respondent or any of his relatives from entering any portion of the shared  
household in which the aggrieved person resides;  
(d) restraining the respondent from alienating or disposing off the shared household or  
encumbering the same;  
(e) restraining the respondent from renouncing his rights in the shared household except with  the 
leave of the Magistrate; or  
(f) directing the respondent to secure same level of alternate accommodation for the aggrieved  
person as enjoyed by her in the shar ed household or to pay rent for the same, if the  circumstances so 
require:  
Provided that no order under clause ( b) shall be passed against any person who is a woman.  
  9 
 (2) The Magistrate may impose any additional conditions or pass any other direction whic h he may 
deem reasonably necessary to protect or to provide for the safety of the aggrieved person  or any child of 
such aggrieved person.  
(3) The Magistrate may require from the respondent to execute a bond, with or without  sureties, for 
preventing the com mission of domestic violence.  
(4) An order under sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be an order under Chapter VIII of the  Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and shall be dealt with accordingly.  
(5) While passing an order under sub -section ( 1), sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), the court  may 
also pass an order directing the officer in charge of the nearest police station to give  protection to the 
aggrieved person or to assist her or the person making an application on her  behalf in the implemen tation 
of the order.  
(6) While making an order under sub -section ( 1), the Magistrate may impose on the respondent  
obligations relating to the discharge of rent and other payments, having regard to the financial  needs and 
resources of the parties.  
(7) The M agistrate may direct the officer in -charge of the police station in whose jurisdiction  the 
Magistrate has been approached to assist in the implementation of the protection order.  
(8) The Magistrate may direct the respondent to return to the possession of t he aggrieved  person her 
stridhan  or any other property or valuable security to which she is entitled to.  
20. Monetary reliefs .—(1) While disposing of an application under sub -section ( 1) of section 12,the 
Magistrate may direct the respondent to pay monetar y relief to meet the expenses incurred  and losses 
suffered by the aggrieved person and any child of the aggrieved person as a result of  the domestic 
violence and such relief m ay include, but not limited to, — 
(a) the loss of earnings;  
(b) the medical expenses;  
(c) the loss caused due to the destruction, damage or removal of any property from the control  of 
the aggrieved person; and  
(d) the maintenance for the aggrieved person as well as her children, if any, including an order  
under or in addition to a n order of maintenance under section 125 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force.  
(2) The monetary relief granted under this section shall be adequate, fair and reasonable and  
consistent with the sta ndard of living to which the aggrieved person is accustomed.  
(3) The Magistra te shall have the power to order  an appropriate lump sum payment or monthly  
payments of maintenance, as the nature and circumstances of the case may require.  
(4) The Magistrate sh all send a copy of the order for monetary relief made under sub -section  (1) to 
the parties to the application and to the in charge of the police station within the local  limits of whose 
jurisdiction the respondent resides.  
(5) The respondent shall pay the monetary relief granted to the aggrieved person within the  period 
specified in the order under sub -section ( 1). 
(6) Upon the failure on the part of the respondent to make payment in terms of the order under                 
sub-section ( 1), the Magistrate may direct the employer or a debtor of the respondent, to  directly pay to 
the aggrieved person or to deposit with the court a portion of the wages or  salaries or debt due to or 
accrued to the credit of the respondent, which amount may be  adjusted towards t he monetary relief 
payable by the respondent.  
21. Custody orders. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in  
force, the Magistrate may, at any stage of hearing of the application for protection order or for  any other 
relief u nder this Act grant temporary custody of any child or children to the  aggrieved person or the 
person making an application on her behalf and specify, if necessary,  the arrangements for visit of such 
child or children by the respondent:  10 
 Provided that if the  Magistrate is of the opinion that any visit of the respondent may be harmful  to the 
interests of the child or children, the Magistrate sh all refuse to allow such visit.  
22. Compensation orders .—In addition to other reliefs as may be granted under this Act , the  
Magistrate may on an application being made by the aggrieved person, pass an order directing  the 
respondent to pay compensation and damages for the injuries, including mental torture and  emotional 
distress, caused by the acts of domestic violenc e com mitted by that respondent.  
23. Power to grant interim and ex parte  orders .—(1) In any proceeding before him under this  Act, 
the Magistrate may pass such interim order as he deems just and proper.  
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that an application prima  facie  discloses that the respondent is  
committing, or has committed an act of domestic violence or that there is a likelihood that the  respondent 
may commit an act of domestic violence, he may grant an ex parte  order on the  basis of the affidavit in 
such form, as may be prescribed, of the aggrieved person under section18, section 19, section 20, section 
21 or, as the case may be, sec tion 22 against the respondent.  
24. Court to give copies of order free of cost. —The Magistrate shall, in all cases where he h as 
passed any order under this Act, order that a copy of such order, shall be given free of cost, to  the parties 
to the application, the police officer in -charge of the police station in the jurisdiction  of which the 
Magistrate has been approached, and any  service provider located within the local  limits of the 
jurisdiction of the court and if any service provider has registered a domestic  incident report, to that 
service provider.  
25. Duration and alteration of orders .—(1) A protection order made under section 18 shall be in  
force till the aggrieved person applies for discharge.  
(2) If the Magistrate, on receipt of an application from the aggrieved person or the respondent,  is 
satisfied that there is a change in the circumstances requiring alteration, mo dification or  revocation of any 
order made under this Act, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing pass  such order, as he may deem 
appropriate.  
26. Relief in oth er suits and legal proceedings .—(1) Any relief available under sections 18, 19,20, 
21 and  22 may also be sought in any legal proceeding, before a civil court, family court or  a criminal 
court, affecting the aggrieved person and the respondent whether such proceeding  was initiated before or 
after the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Any relief ref erred to in sub -section ( 1) may be sought for in addition to and along with any  other 
relief that the aggrieved person may seek in such suit or legal proceeding before a civil or  criminal court.  
(3) In case any relief has been obtained by the aggrieved per son in any proceedings other than  a 
proceeding under this Act, she shall be bound to inform the Magistrate of the grant of such  relief . 
27. Jurisdiction .—(1) The court of Judicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan  
Magistrate, as the case ma y be, w ithin the local limits of which — 
(a) the person aggrieved permanently or temporarily resides or carries on business or is  
employed; or  
(b) the respondent resides or carries on business or is employed; or  
(c) the cause of action has arisen,  shall be the competent court to grant a protection order and 
other orders under this Act and to  try offences under this Act.  
(2) Any order made under this Act shall be enforceable throughout India.  
28. Procedure .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all proc eedings under sections 12,18,      
19, 20, 21, 22 and 23 and offences under section 31 shall be governed by the provisions of  the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall prevent the court from laying down its own procedure for  disposal 
of an application under section 12 or under  sub-section ( 2) of section 23.  11 
 29. Appeal. —There shall lie an appeal to the Court of Session within thirty days from the date  on 
which the order made by the Magistrate is served on the aggr ieved person or the respondent,  as the case 
may be, whichever is later.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
30. Protection Officers and members of service p roviders to be public servants .—The Protection  
Officers and members of service providers, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of  any of the 
provisions of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder shall be deemed to be  public servants within 
the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
31. Penalty for breach of protection or der by respondent. —(1) A breach of protection order, or  of 
an interim protection order, by the respondent shall be an offence under this Act and shall be  punishable 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year,  or with fi ne which may 
extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) The offence under sub -section ( 1) shall as far as practicable be tried by the Magistrate who  had 
passed the order, the breach of which has been alleged to have been caused by the accused.  
(3) While framing charges under sub -section (1), the Magistrate may also frame charges under  section 
498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other provision of that Code or the  Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961 (28 of 1961), as the case may be, if the fac ts disclose the  commission of an offence under those 
provisions.  
32. Cognizance and proof .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal  
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 31 shall be  cognizable and                  
non-bailable.  
(2) Upon the sole testimony of the aggrieved person, the court may conclude that an offence  under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 31 has been committed by the accused.  
33. Penalty for not discharg ing duty by Protection Officer. —If any Protection Officer fails or  
refuses to discharge his duties as directed by the Magistrate in the protection order without any  sufficient 
cause, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which  may extend to one 
year, or wit h fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with  both.  
34. Cognizance of offence c ommitted by Protection Officer .—No prosecution or other legal  
proceeding shall lie against the Protection Officer unless a complaint is filed with the previous  sanction of 
the State Government or an officer authorised by it in this behalf.  
35. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall  
lie against the Protection Officer for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything  which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made  thereunder.  
36. Act not in derogation of any other law. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to,  and 
not in derogation of the provisions of a ny other law, for the time being in force.  
37. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by  
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of  the foregoing power, such rules may  
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the qualifications and experience which a Protection Officer shall possess under                              
sub-section  (2) of section 8;  
(b) the terms and  conditions of service of the Protection Officers and the other officers  
subordinate to him, under sub -section ( 3) of section 8;  
(c) the form and manner in which a domestic incident report may be made under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 9;  
(d) the form and the manner in which an application for protection order may be made to the  
Magistrate under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  12 
 (e) the form in which a complaint is to be filed under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 9;  
(f) the o ther duties to be performed by the Protection Officer under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 9;  
(g) the rules regulating registration of service providers under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(h) the form in which an application under sub -section ( 1) of section 12 seeking reliefs under  this 
Act may be made and the particulars which such application shall contain under sub -section  (3) of 
that section;  
(i) the means of serving notices under sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(j) the form of declaration of  service of notice to be made by the Protection Officer under                       
sub-section  (2) of section 13;  
(k) the qualifications and experience in counselling which a member of the service provider  shall 
possess under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(l) the form in which an affidavit may be filed by the aggrieved person under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23;  
(m) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  before each  House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be  comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the  session immediately 
following the session or the succe ssive sessions aforesaid, both Houses  agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be  made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the  case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice  to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
 